GEETHA VAHINI Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust Prasanthi Nilayam P.O. 515 134, Anantapur District, A.P. (India.). (The Divine Gospel) All Rights Reserved The copyright and the rights of translation in any language are reserved by the Publishers. No part, passage, text or photograph or Artwork of this book should be reproduced, transmitted or utilised, in original language or by translation, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photo copying, recording or by any information, storage and retrieval system except with the express and prior permission, in writing from the Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (Andhra Pradesh) India - Pin Code 515 134, except for brief passages quoted in book review. This book can be exported from India only by the Publishers by - Sri Sathya Sai Books and Publications Trust, Prasanthi Nilayam (India). Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba International Standard Book Number: 81-7208-302-5 First Enlarged Edition: June 2002 Price Rs. PRASANTHI NILAYAM Published by: The Convener, Sri Sathya Sai Books & Publications Trust Prasanthi Nilayam, India - Pin Code 515 134 SRI SATHYA SAI BOOKS & PUBLICATIONS TRUST STD: 08555 ISD: 0091-8555 Grams: BOOKTRUST Telephone: 87375 Fax: 87236 Prasanthi Nilayam - 515 134 Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India. Grams: BOOK TRUST STD: 08555 ISD: 91-8555 Printed at: Omkar Offset Printers, Phone: 87375 Fax: 87236 No. 3/4, 1 Main, N.T. Pet, Bangalore - 560 002.
path of Sathya, asphalted by Dharma and illumined by Prema towards the goal of Shanthi. Arjuna accepted Him in that role, let us do likewise. When worldly attachment hinders the path of duty, when ambition blinds the eyes of sympathy, when hate shuts out the call of Love, let us listen to the Geetha. He teaches us from the chariot whereon He is installed. Then He showers His Grace, His Vision and His Power, and we are made heroes fit to fight and win. GREETINGS This precious book is not a commentary or summary of the Geetha that was taught on the field of Kurukshetra. We need not learn any new language or read any old text to imbibe the lesson that the Lord is eager to teach us now, for B hagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba is the Sanathana victory in the battle we are now waging. This Geetha Vahini Sarathi, the Timeless Charioteer, who is the same stream, refreshing and revitalising, brought by communicated the Geetha Sastra to Adithya the same Divine Restorer to revivify man caught in the mesh and helped Manu and King Ikshvaku to know it. He was the of modern dialectics, in the pride of modern science, in the charioteer of Arjuna during the great battle between Good cynical scorn of modern superficiality. The teaching here and Evil fought out at Kurukshetra. When the rider, Arjuna, set forth will comfort, console, and confer strength and was overcome with grief at the prospect of the fight, Krishna faith. instructed him in the science of recognising one’s Oneness Let us listen to these words with as much care and with all, and removed the grief and the fear. concentration as Arjuna had, even in the turmoil of a battlefield, and we too will declare when the book nears its He is the charioteer even now, for every one of us; let final pages, “My delusion is dissolved. I have become aware me greet you as a fellow-sufferer and a fellow-disciple. We of My Reality, which is God.” have but to recognise Him and accept Him in that role, holding the reins of discrimination and flourishing the whip The Ancient Charioteer who is in you and me has of detachment, to direct the horses of the senses along the responded to the call of the conflict-ridden hearts. He gave
these lessons in the “Sanathana Sarathi” that is published CONTENTS from the Prasanthi Nilayam. Now, they are with you, between 01. Chapter - I nn1 covers, as a Book, which you can read as often as you can 02. Chapter - II nn13 or must. 03. Chapter - III nn21 May the faith with which you have started to scan 04. Chapter - IV nn33 these pages grow from day to day. May you be drawn by 05. Chapter - V nn45 the ever widening vista of knowledge which this book reveals 06. Chapter - VI nn55 to the grand Glory of the experience of the Oneness, which 07. Chapter - VII nn65 is the basis of this Manifoldness. 08. Chapter - VIII nn75 09. Chapter - IX 7 8 87 N. Kasturi 10. Chapter - X nn97 11. Chapter - XI nn107 12. Chapter - XII nn121 13. Chapter - XIII nn133 14. Chapter - XIV nn145 15. Chapter - XV nn157 16. Chapter - XVI nn169 17. Chapter - XVII nn181 18. Chapter - XVIII nn193 19. Chapter - XIX nn203 20. Chapter - XX nn213 21. Chapter - XXI nn223 22. Chapter - XXII nn233 23. Chapter - XXIII nn243 24. Chapter - XXIV nn255 25. Chapter - XXV nn261 26. Chapter - XXVI nn269 27. Chapter - XXVII nn279
Geetha Vahini 2 Geetha Vahini The Geetha is a text for spiritual practitioners, for it emphasises sadhana (spiritual discipline), and spiritual attitudes, more than anything else. Every chapter lays down means and methods of reaching the goal of peace and harmony. Now sadhana is the product of keen and steady yearning for progress. The aspirant must aspire, not despair. He must persevere, not clamour for quick success. The Geetha is as a boat, which takes man across from the self- imposed state of bondage to the freedom which is his nature. CHAPTER I He is taken from darkness to Light, from lustrelessness to Splendour. The Geetha ordains for man disciplines and duties which are free from the taints of Vasanas (tendencies T o understand the meaning of the Geetha, the and impulses) that tie him to the relentless wheel of birth reverential approach is necessary. You must and death. take up its study in an attitude of submission Really speaking, man has come into this Karmakshetra and expectancy. For the Geetha is the “milk” of the (Field of Activity) only to engage himself in activity, not in Upanishads, “drawn” by the Cowherd Krishna with the help order to earn the fruit of such activity. That is the teaching of Arjuna, “the calf,” for all the “dull-witted” to drink and of the Geetha, its fundamental lesson. The Geetha is the draw sustenance from. There are some who argue that the quintessence of the meaning of all the Vedas, Yajnas and Geetha as a sacred poem was a creation later than the Yagas (offerings for the glory of God). The outward-directed Mahabharatha, of which it is a part; but whatever may be activities are mentioned in the preliminary portions of the said of the composition of the Geetha, there is no doubt Vedas. Activities of the mind, like the Upasanas, which are that the principles and teachings of the Geetha are ancient, directed inward are mentioned later. Jnana Yoga too is nay, dateless. In the first three slokas of the fourth chapter, expounded to minds thus clarified and purified. reference is made to the Lord instructing the Geetha to Surya (Sun) first and later to Manu; and to the fact that from Manu Whoever the individual, however scholarly, he cannot it reached Ikshvaku and thence to others in succession! So escape delusion and so he is subjected to grief, which acts the Geetha is beyond the category of time and it cannot be as a brake upon activity. Arjuna, the great hero, capable of assigned to a particular point of time, past or present. great renunciation, and of great wisdom, is deluded by the
Geetha Vahini 3 4 Geetha Vahini awful needs of war and his grief handicaps his activity too. Arjuna is the Jivi, the individual. The Body is the He confuses the body and the self, he starts identifying the Chariot and the Teacher in the Chariot is Krishna, the Lord. two. He imposes on the Atma (ever untouched by the The Charioteer is the Lord, the Inspirer of the Intelligence, characteristics of the moving, changing world) the unreal the Brahman which prompts It in answer to man’s prayer and ephemeral nature of the world and takes this delusion contained in the Gayathri Manthra “Dhiyoyonah as true. He believes that his duties, as laid down by that prachodayath…” (Awaken my Discrimination, O Lord and guide me). The Kauravas represent the demonic nature. The false identification, are his Atma-dharma! This is the tragedy Pandavas represent the Divine. They are Asat, these are not of Arjuna alone but of all humanity! Therefore, the Geetha Sat; one is evil, the other is good. And there has ever been is of universal and eternal value. To study the Geetha is to a struggle between the two. In this conflict between opposing learn the art of swimming across the sea of Delusion. The forces, Krishna (the Self, the Atma) is ever on the side of Geetha is the very Voice of Lord Krishna. The fact that it Dharma—the Reality which sustains, not the Delusion which has provided consolation and liberation to millions of men undermines. If you seek to have the Lord on your side, as is evidence of its Divine Origin. A lesser person could not your Guide, equip yourself with the Divine Nature, (Daivi have given it that authenticity. Sampath), the qualities of Dharma. For the Lord is where Dharma is. The way it begins and the way it ends, that gives the clue to the subject which it expounds. The very first verse Of course, this does not mean that the Lord is not starts with the words. “Dharma-kshethre (Abode of omnipresent…! Butter is omnipresent in the milk, though it dharma), Kurukshethre…,” the word Dharma being the can be made manifest in one location, in the milk, only by leading word. The last verse of the final Eighteenth Chapter the process of curdling and churning. So too, the Lord can speaks of “Yathra Yogeswarah Krishna” and this word, be made manifest in one location by the process of Dharma “Yogeswarah” sums up the Dharma that is taught. Thus it is Sadhana. “Yatho dharmasthatho jayah”; “Where there is clear that the objective of the teaching in the Geetha is just Dharma, there Victory is achieved.” Arjuna was engrossed this: “Remember Dharma; practise Dharma.” How with the physical aspect and so it was necessary to bless significant is this word! All Sastras are engaged in him with the Knowledge of the Real, the Atmic aspect. The demarcating and defining the nature and subtle characteristics entire complex of sadhana (spiritual discipline) is directed of Dharma. The Geetha incorporates this study and this to the clarification of the awareness of Atma and the fixing analysis. It is a textbook of Dharma, in all its aspects. It of attention on That. The Teaching of Krishna is just this; in discusses all the principles underlying Dharma. fact, this is the sum and substance of the search for Truth.
Geetha Vahini 5 6 Geetha Vahini Krishna answered many doubts that had entangled to the physical, the material—the body. They do not affect Arjuna, but which he failed to express, “O Arjuna! You are the spirit, the Soul. The moment you escape from these grieving because these kings and princes who are related to two, that moment you are liberated. You have Moksha (Self- you are about to meet death at your hands. You talk glibly realisation).” of Dharma. But remember, the wise do not grieve either for The First Discourse which teaches these truths is the living or the dead. Shall I tell you why? Well, you are named Arjuna Vishada Yoga, the Despondency of Arjuna. feeling grief over the body, which alone decays on death. That is the very foundation of the edifice which is the Did you grieve when the body underwent many changes Bhagavad Geetha. When the foundation is strong the edifice hitherto? The child disappeared in the boy, the boy too is lasting. The Geetha built on that foundation 5000 disappeared in the youth, the youth became lost in the middle- years ago, is unshaken and unshakeable. From this, you aged man, the middle-aged man was lost in the aged old can infer how strong is the foundation on which it rests and man and the old man is lost in death. You never wept for the how wise is the Person who laid it. changes that affected the body so long; why then weep for this one change? Have you, today, the body you had when You refer to it as “despondency”! But that you were a boy? Where is that frame you had when you “despondency” was very beneficial. It was no ordinary tied Dhrishtadyumna up? You still remember that boyish “want of courage.” For it tested his sincerity and exploit; but the body that achieved it is gone! So too, steadfastness. It induced him to take unquestioning refuge whatever changes your body may suffer, the Atma, the in the Lord. That is why it is dignified by the name, Yoga. Splendour of the true Wisdom, remains Immortal. Being The Geetha which begins with the Vishada Yoga ends with established unshakeably in this knowledge is the sign of the the Sanyasa Yoga. Vishada is the Foundation and Sanyasa, Wise, the Jnani.” Thus said Krishna. the Superstructure. Vishada is the seed and Sanyasa, the Fruit. “You may ask whether you would not feel sad when the bodies with which one had moved and lived for years The question may be raised: how could Arjuna be go out of sight. But for how many have you to lament, in credited with a pure nature, which alone is said to deserve case it is proper so to grieve! Have you thought of that? Joy the Wisdom, imparted in the Geetha? The word “Arjuna” and grief are as day and night. They have to be put up with, means pure, unsullied, white. He is named very appropriately gone through. If you refuse, they won’t stop happening. If and he lived up to the name that he bore. That is how he you desire, they won’t start happening! They are both related secured the Immediate Presence of Lord Krishna, that is
Geetha Vahini 7 8 Geetha Vahini how he became the Instrument for the Award of the Geetha with which they are familiar and start teaching young minds to the World. in that strain! Of course, full renunciation is highly desirable. But only a very small number can practise it. If a certain Krishna uses the word, Yoga, many times in the Geetha. spiritual teaching has to gain universal acceptance, it must The state of the Individual (or Jivi) during Yoga too is have disciplines that can be practised and experienced by described. Yet, a doubt may arise in the minds of those everyone in daily life and its activities. who have read the Geetha that there is no agreement between the word as used ordinarily and as used by Krishna. Krishna The highest Dharma is for each one to follow his Swa— has extolled Vairagya (detachment) in some places. At other (own) Dharma boldly. As regards this problem, there is a places, He has declared that the highest Freedom can be conflict between religion and morals. “Gahana karmano earned by Worship. Various methods of attaining the gathih.” It is difficult, fraught with danger, says the Lord, Supreme state of spiritual Bliss are also elaborated. In the speaking of the moral discipline. Which act is legitimate, Eighth Discourse, there is an account of Raja Yoga, but it is which not? Which act is sanctioned by morals, which not? not right to say that the Geetha is a text that teaches Raja Persons have struggled and are struggling to decide these. Yoga. But Krishna has mentioned the type of acts which are worthy, Complete surrender to Lord Krishna, freedom from in the Slokas: the threefold shackles which bind one with the external world Manmanaa bhava madbhaktho mad yajee maam namaskuru of objects, the observance of good deeds and virtuous Maamevaishyasi sathyam the, prathijaane priyo si me. disciplines, these are the principal truths underlined in the Sarva dharmaan parithyajya maamekam saranam vraja Geetha. The Lord holds these forth as the best forms of Aham thwaam sarva paapebhyo moksha-yaishyami maa training and the deepest secrets of inner progress. suchah. The real meaning of the Geetha is not grasped by all. “Fix thy thought on Me. Be devoted to Me. Worship Reputed scholars and writers, though gifted with rare intelligence, have failed to unravel the mystery of its message. Me. Do homage to Me. Thou shalt reach Me. The Truth do Commentators speak of the principle of perfect balance I declare to thee. For thou art dear to Me. This is My amidst all change, or of the achievement of freedom as more teaching, My grace. This is the path to come to Me. Give important than anything else. On the other side, others up all Dharmas. Surrender to Me. Do not grieve; I shall compare the Geetha with the philosophical texts of the West liberate you from the consequences of all your acts.”
Geetha Vahini 9 10 Geetha Vahini Ah! Note the meaning and significance of these two Saalokya (Existence in God) Sayujya (Unity in God), are stanzas. Is not this Act of Surrender enough to save you indicated. When one has attained the state of realising the and to liberate you from the round of coming to—staying Divinity in every Being, when every instrument of knowledge in—and leaving from this world? Thanmana—that is, seeing brings the Experience of that Divinity, when It alone is seen, Him in every Being, being aware of Him every moment of heard, tasted, smelt and touched, man becomes undoubtedly existence, being immersed in the Ananda (bliss, joy) of this a part of the Body of God and lives in Him and with Him. awareness. Thadbhaktha—that is, merged in the relationship When this duty to your own progress is taken up you will caused by profound devotion and love to Him. That-yaji— get a new strength at the very first step. You will thrill to a all acts, big and small dedicated to Him, Krishna, (wish, new and purer joy. You will taste the fullness of Bliss. You will, attitude, activity, fruit, consequence) everything from will be refreshed by a new holiness. beginning to end, the renunciation of all attachment to the This Dharma is not laid down or recommended for self and the performance of all acts in a spirit of worshipful the extraordinary among men. It is within the reach of all, non-attachment. This is what the Lord seeks from you. for all have the hunger for God, all have the discrimination Of course, it is hard to effect this full surrender. But if to discover that there is something basic behind all this man makes but the slightest effort towards it, the Lord change. Even the most heinous sinner can quickly cleanse Himself will confer the courage to pursue it to the end. He his heart and become pure, by surrendering to the Lord in will walk with him and help him as a friend. He will lead him anguished repentance. as a Guide. He will guard him from evil and temptation. He Therefore, the Lord’s Command is that each should will be his staff and support. He has said, pursue the special Dharma laid down for him. Each person “Swalpamapyasya Dharmasya thrayathe mahatho should plan his life according to the spiritual foundations of bhayaath.” (This course of action, if followed even to a his culture, he should give up the “objective” vision and small extent, will save him from terrifying fear.) To follow Dharma is itself a source of joy. It is the path least beset listen to the Voice of God. with hurdles. This is the Teaching of the Lord. Those born in Bharath (India) should deserve the “Maamevaishyasi” (you will come near Me, you will privilege by listening to the voice of the Leader of Bharath— be approaching Me); that is to say, you will understand My Gopala—and manifest the Divinity latent in them in every Mystery, you will enter into Me, you will achieve My nature. word they utter, every letter they limn, every wish they In these terms, Saadrisya (Acquiring Divine Nature) entertain, every thought they frame, and every act they do
Geetha Vahini 11 12 Geetha Vahini for the winning of gross things, such as food or shelter or health. Then only can this Indian Nation demonstrate to the world the excellence of the Ancient Religion, the Sanathana Dharma (the eternal path), its special gift to humanity, and ensure peace for all mankind. Acts in line with that Dharma alone can confer the strength of spirit which can encounter all crises and achieve victory. The sacred Geetha grants that boon, by indicating clearly the Way.
Geetha Vahini 14 Geetha Vahini on the side of the Pandavas, how can this King’s wicked plan succeed?” Then he pictured to himself the ghastly consequences of Arjuna jumping into the fray. But Arjuna had teardrops falling down his cheeks. There were whirlpools in his eyes. Even the Lord could not bear the sight. He could not remain silent. He felt the pulse beat of Arjuna and diagnosed the malady. He knew in a trice that the malady of Moha (the delusion caused by false CHAPTER II evaluation) had penetrated his three bodies: the Gross, the Subtle and the Causal. The pity that enveloped Arjuna was not ‘genuine,’ He saw. For genuine pity will be endowed T he first chapter is better named, “Arjuna with Daivi Sampath (Divine elevating impulses and motives); Geetha,” rather than Krishna Geetha. Over it will not disregard the orders of the Lord. It was really come by sorrow and delusion, Arjuna turns egoism, under the veil of pity. So, the Lord decided to cure from war and keeps aside his weapons. He is dejected in him of that weakness. “Kripayaavishtam,” the Geetha says: his chariot, halted between the two opposing forces. He Arjuna was helpless, “overwhelmed by pity,” and that had turns this way and that, puzzled and perturbed. He surveys to be cured. the faces of his kith and kin. He is overcome by pity. His famous bow slips from his grasp, he is too weak to stand Just as a spirit entering a person has to be exorcised, or even sit. His mind wanders into the dictates of the Purva Arjuna has to be freed from fear and cowardice. For he Mimaamsa school of thought. He swears he will not engage who has the Lord by his side need entertain no fear. What in fighting. When Sanjaya reported this to the blind King, can any ‘bhooth’ (spirit) do to one who is the Lord of all Dhritharashtra, he was overjoyed, for victory was within the Five Bhuthas (elements)? “Vaidyo Narayano Harih.” grasp! He had neither foresight nor farsight, much less the The Lord is the Supreme Doctor. Narayana was the Doctor Divine Vision; so he felt happy that his dream of an Arjuna needed and got. undiminished Empire had come true, without bother. How lucky was Arjuna! Even from the depths of grief, But Sanjaya who had Divine Vision felt, “What is this joy will swell. Until the 11th sloka of the 2nd chapter, it is insane joy which is affecting him? When the Lord is Himself the story of the despondency of Arjuna, the effect of “the
Geetha Vahini 15 16 Geetha Vahini possession.” That is why the first step in the cure is the we could. Now war is the only method by which the eyes exposition of Sankhya Yoga, the Path of Knowledge, of the evil-minded Duryodhana can be opened to his own (Jnana). iniquity. The Amrithopadesa (Immortality-bestowing Teaching) “This war was decided on after long deliberation. It is of Krishna begins from this 11th sloka. In fact, the Bhagavad not a hasty resolution taken in a fit of anger. Responsible Geetha starts from this point. Up to this point it is the elders have weighed the pros and cons and come to the description of Arjuna’s delusion born of ignorance and conclusion that the resort to arms is inevitable. You and dullness of intellect. Krishna, acting the role of witness, allows your brothers approved all this and appreciated the decision. the despondency to deepen and darken. When at last Arjuna You have been preparing for this battle with enthusiasm. In threw down his bow and refused to fight, when he confessed fact, you have been immersed in it more than others. How that he had lost all sense of right and wrong, when he prayed wrong is it for you now to turn back? that Krishna should teach him the Way that will solve his problems best, then, Krishna came forward and said: “This war has not pounced on you in a trice. You have been collecting the wherewithal since long. Remember how “Arjuna! How could this miserable shade of cowardice you struggled and starved and lived on roots and fruits of overtake you now, when you have been clear and bright all the forest in order to win the Paasupatha Asthra from Lord along? This is quite unbecoming to the hero you are. The Shiva, how you went as far as the Loka (world) of the Lord word Arjuna means pure, unblemished character. Why then of Gods, Indra, in order to win celestial arrows for this this grief? The battle is imminent. The clouds of war have battle? gathered and are thundering. The foes in front are awaiting the moment when they could jump into the fray. They have “I thought that the moment of destiny for the heaped countless injustices and cruelties on you and now annihilation they deserved has come for the wicked Kaurava they are ready to grab the land that must come to you as of brood; but now you have started this mourning dirge! Why right. You have so far borne all the agony they have poured this ominous note? Which Sastra lays down this attitude? over you, without stirring even an iota away from truth. You Think of your duty as a member of the Kshatriya (warrior) have fulfilled all the conditions they imposed and you have caste: to uphold Dharma, to protect Justice. Yours is the passed through the years they prescribed for your exile. wealth of courage, adventure and steadiness. But you are Your attempts to effect a compromise were futile, you could overpowered by this strange detachment, which is not avoid the clash of arms. We have yielded as much as pathetically out of place.
Geetha Vahini 17 18 Geetha Vahini “This cowardice brings shame on you and even on the Divine in man) and Akeerthikaram (quality that causes your far-famed forefathers. Fie on you! You have dragged the decline of the wealth that is lasting). down the Kshatriya race into disgrace. War is the royal road These inspiring words that will make the blood of any for your kind, the road which leads to Heaven. How can Kshatriya boil had a tremendous effect on Arjuna. The thick you escape infamy if you withdraw from the field now? cloud of ignorance which had overwhelmed Arjuna started You have earned the title, Vijaya, by the prowess of your to melt a little. The Thamas (dullness, delusion) which had arm. Do not tarnish the reputation you have won by a lifetime made him forget the truth got removed. Rajo Guna of effort. Give up this weakening delusion. (passionate emotion) returned and Arjuna found words to “Listen to me, remind yourself of what happened at ask, “Katham?” (How?). That term reveals much. It shows Amaravathi. You disregarded the approaches of the Divine that the Geetha expounds not merely what has to be done, Damsel, Urvasi and when she wanted a son through your but even how it has to be done. grace, you replied, ‘Take me as your son.’ That revealed Arjuna asks Krishna, “O Madhusudana! Listen to my you as an incomparable hero. The curse that she spelt on words: Those who are in the forefront of the battle line are you in her discomfiture helped you at the court of the Virata all worthy of worship. The great Bhishma took care of us King to pass off as an eunuch, teaching dance to the royal when we lost our father and brought us up from childhood princesses, is it not? and shaped us into what we are. He is as a father to us, the Grand Old Man of our clan. And what shall I say of Drona? “Where has that heroism gone, tell Me. How has this He loved me more than he loved his own son, Aswathama. pusillanimity come over such a stalwart? You came to Me I had all his love. He is the Guru who, through that love, and disturbed Me in sleep with your request for help in this took me as his favourite disciple and made me into the battle from which you are now running away. Am I to help bowman that I am. Do you want me now to use the skill he you thus? Have I to watch while you are fleeing? Pluck this taught to overthrow him? Is it right for a son of Bharath to delusion by the roots. Reduce this fear into ashes. Become do such a thing? In battle we have to kill our enemies, is it a hero again.” Thus exhorted Krishna. not? Or, can we fight with fathers and teachers, who deserve reverence? Krishna uses four words in this context: Kasmalam (ignorance), Anaarya-jushtam (character that is harmful to “You say that Heaven can be won by battle. I cannot the Divine Nature in each), Aswargyam (quality that destroys realise how Heaven can be got through the killing of these
Geetha Vahini 19 20 Geetha Vahini revered Gurus. If this idea spreads, few Gurus can survive! a zero. He had taken a position the very opposite of that Whatever you might say, let me tell you this: rather than taken up by Krishna. earn happiness and power through these means, I feel it is The reason for all this, if you carefully study the better to live on alms collected from door to door. Food situation, is nothing but “egoism.” Prema (love) is the won through killing such men is mixed with their blood, and viewpoint of Krishna and Bhrama (delusion), of Arjuna. I would prefer a meal got through beggary. Well, even if I He suffered from agony because of that. Then he realised give up all these qualms and fight, how can victory be that egoism led only to further ignorance and confusion. He counted upon? Expecting victory to come to us, how can I surrendered his judgement to the Lord and saved himself. resolve to slaughter these elders and lose both worlds? If He said he was but an instrument in the hands of the Lord. by chance they win, then beggary is inevitable. If we win, it Recognising one’s error is the first excellence of a good is as bad as losing, for of what gain is victory if the price we disciple. It is the beginning of wisdom. Only the foolish will pay is the destruction of kith and kin? We gain but feel they know all and suffer from the dire disease of a inconsolable grief for the rest of life. Krishna! I am at a loss swollen head. to solve this problem. My intelligence has deserted me. My nature has undergone a vast change. I do not know why. I cannot distinguish between right and wrong, Dharma and Adharma (unrighteousness). “My Kshatriya (warrior) blood rises up in protest when you prod it so. It is pushing me forward into battle. Fear of becoming the murderer of these reverend elders is pulling me back. I am helpless. As you are guiding this chariot, guide me also and show me the way. Moreover, I am no more concerned with worldly prosperity. I crave for spiritual progress only,” he said. From that moment, Krishna became the Guru and Arjuna, the Disciple. Arjuna prayed for that status and got it. Until Arjuna accepted this attitude of a learner, his heart was filled with egoism and weakness. The hero had become
Geetha Vahini 22 Geetha Vahini this Geetha? Krishna says it is for the “Sudhee-jana,” the persons who have “Su-dhee.” Intelligence that is moderated by Goodness. Intelligence that is controlled by Virtue. What of the place where the Teaching was given? Between two opposing Armies! Therein lies the great significance of the Geetha. On one side, the forces of Dharma, on the other, the forces of Adharma. On one side, the Good, on the other, the Bad. Between these two pulls, the Individual, unable to decide which course to adopt, CHAPTER III weeps in despair. The Lord speaks the Geetha to all such and grants them light and courage. Do not think that the I distress of Arjuna was just his affair, his problem and no t is more useful for the student to search for his more. It is a universal human problem. own faults with a view to remove them, than to seek excellences so that he might exult over them. For, Arjuna sought from Krishna, not Preyas—the A student who does this can progress fast. He is not dragged pleasing, worldly glory of power and status and wealth; but behind by fear or anxiety. He can move on, with faith in the Sreyas, the lasting glory of full Joy. He said, “Preyas is Lord, on whom he has placed all his burdens. He reaches a available for human effort. It can be won by human activity state of mental calm, which is the sign of the true aspirant. or karma. Why should I crave from You what I can win by Arjuna arrived at that stage, and then, Krishna gave him my own endeavour? I am not so foolish as all that. Grant (and, through him, to all mankind) the teaching that confers me the Sreyas that is beyond the reach of my effort. Sreyas immortality. is not the fruit of karma. It is the fruit of Grace!” Thus Arjuna rose to the height of Saranagathi, absolute Self- For whom was the Geetha spoken? Just think of that surrender, the state called Prapaththi. for one moment. Milk is not taken from the udder for the sake of the cow, for cows do not drink their own milk. Much can be said of Saranagathi. Man surrenders his Arjuna, the calf, has had his fill. Krishna is ever-content and dignity and status to other men for various purposes in life: He needs nothing, not to mention, milk! For whose sake wealth, fame, possessions, pomp, power, etc. But rarely was it that the Upanishads were milked by Krishna to get does he get the chance to surrender to the Lord for the sake
Geetha Vahini 23 24 Geetha Vahini of the Lord! How can he get the urge, so long as he craves clasp of these arms; but you cannot escape from my heart, for the Aadheya (entire creation based on the five elements) where I have bound you,” challenged Surdas. The Lord and not the Aadhara (The Universal, pure existence)? He just smiled and assented; “I am bound by My devotees,” longs for the object, but does not long for the base on He asserts, without any loss of self-respect. The devotee which the object rests. How long can a baseless object can tie up the Lord with his Prema (love); by Bhakthi satisfy? He wants the gift, not the giver—the created not the (devotion) that overwhelms and overpowers his egoism. Creator, things from the Hand, but not the Hand! He is When man is full of this type of Bhakthi, the Lord will running after a non-existent thing. Can there be an object Himself bless him with everything he needs; His Grace will without a pre-existent Cause? No, if there is One, it can fulfil all his wants. Remind yourself here of the promise only be the Uncaused God. It is, therefore, sheer ignorance made by the Lord in the Geetha: “Yogakshemam to surrender individuality for the sake of the transitory vahaamyaham,” (I carry the burden of his welfare). products of action, the “caused” rather than the Cause. Next, about the third stage: “Thwam-eva-aham ithi Surrender rather to the Basis, the Cause and the Origin of thridhaa”; this is the Avibhaktha Bhakthi, the inseparable All, the Sarveswara. That is genuine Saranagathi (surrender). devotion. The devotee offers all to the Lord, including There are three types of Saranagathi: Thavaivaaham himself, for he feels that he cannot withhold himself. That (I am Thine), Mamaiva-thwam (You are mine) and Thwam- completes his surrender. eva-aham (Thou art I). The first affirms, I am Yours, the The Thwam-eva-aham feeling is the Adwaithic (non- second asserts, You are mine and the third declares, You dualistic) Saranagathi (surrender), based on the realisation and I are One, the Same. Each is just a step in the rising that all this (Idam) is Vaasudeva and nothing less, nothing series and the last is the highest step of all. else. So long as the consciousness of the deha or body In the first stage, Thwam-eva-aham, the Lord is fully persists, the bhaktha (devotee) is the servant and the Lord free and the Devotee is fully bound. It is like the cat and the is Master. So long as the individual feels that he is separate kitten. The cat shifts the kitten about as it wills. The kitten from other individuals, the bhaktha is a part and the Lord is just mews and accepts whatever happens. This attitude is the Whole. When he progresses to the state when he gets very gentle and is within easy reach of all. In the second, beyond the limits of the body as well as of “I” and “Mine,” Mama-eva-thwam, the devotee binds the Lord, who is to then, there is no more distinction; Bhaktha and Bhagawan that extent “un-free.” Surdas is a good example of this are the same. In the Ramayana, Hanuman achieved this attitude. “Krishna! You may escape from my hold, from the third stage through Bhakthi (devotion).
Geetha Vahini 25 26 Geetha Vahini This same subject is mentioned in the seventh sloka of Arjuna into grief was of this nature—seeing many, when the second chapter of the Geetha. The word Prapanna there is only one. (one who has surrendered to God), used there indicates Absence of the knowledge of the identity of Thath that Arjuna has the qualification, the discipline of Bhakthi. thwam (the word ‘thathwa,’ used to mean principle, Moreover Arjuna had analysed his own faults and recognised enshrines this great philosophical doctrine) is the cause of them as such. Again, he had awakened from Thamas all ignorance. If this truth is not learnt, man has to flounder (dullness). Krishna appreciated this, the moment it happened. in the ocean of grief. But if it is learnt and if man lives in that He said, “You are called Guda-kesa for you are Jitha-nidra: consciousness, then he can be free from grief. Many a Nidra or sleep is the characteristic of thamas. How then prescription is recommended, used, publicised and repeated can this thamas overwhelm you now? It is just a temporary parrot-like by all kinds of quacks. But they do not go to the phase. It can never bind you fast.” root of the matter. They are balms applied to the eye to cure If Arjuna has, by his efforts, won control over his senses an ache in the stomach. The disease and the drug have no and earned the name Gudakesa, Krishna as Hrishikesa, is co-ordination! The ache must be spotted and diagnosed the Presiding Deity of all the senses! On the field of and the drug must be such as will remove it. Then alone can Kurukshetra both are in the same chariot, one as learner and it be cured. Narayana is the only medical expert who can do the other as teacher! so. He has diagnosed Arjuna’s illness correctly and decided on the treatment. What exactly is the cause of all grief? It is the attachment to the body that produces grief as well as its The wound that will not be healed by external immediate precursors: affection and hate. These two are application of balms has to be cured by internal remedies. the results of the intellect considering some things and So Krishna prodded Arjuna with queries. “Why do you conditions as beneficial, and some other things and weep like a coward? Is it because Bhishma, Drona and the conditions as not. This is a delusion, this idea of beneficence rest are about to be killed? No, you weep because you feel and malevolence. Still you get attached to objects that are they are ‘your men.’ It is egoism that makes you weep. considered beneficial and you start hating the others. But People weep not for the dead, but because the dead are from the highest point of view, there is neither, the distinction ‘theirs.’ Have you not killed until now many who were ‘not is just meaningless. There are no two at all. How can there yours’? You never shed any tears for them. Today you weep, be good and bad then? To see two where there is only One, since you are under the delusion that these whom you see that is Maya, or Ignorance. The ignorance that plunged before you are somehow ‘yours’ in a special way. When
Geetha Vahini 27 28 Geetha Vahini you sleep, you are unaffected by this feeling of ‘I’ and is a delusion Out of the Ordinary. Krishna destroys the first ‘Mine’; so you are unaware what happens to your body or and removes the second. The first is dealt with from the the bodies of these, ‘your men,’ or to your possessions, 12th to the 30th sloka of the second chapter; Krishna has to items which you carefully remember while awake. ‘Mine’ is tackle the second as a special problem and explain in eight the possessive case of ‘I’ and so it comes in its trail. The slokas the idea of Swadharma or His own Dharma to Arjuna. fundamental ignorance, my dear fool, is the identification of These are collectively called Dharmashtakas. Swadharma yourself with something that is not you; viz. the body. Deha does not bind and produce further birth. It can lead on to (material body) is An-atma (non self); you believe that it is Liberation. It has to be done as Karma Yoga, without the Atma (Divine self). What a topsy-turvy bit of knowledge attachment to the fruit. Towards the close of the second is this. To cure this Ajnana, I must administer the medicine chapter, there is also the description of the successful of Jnana (wisdom) itself.” aspirant who has steadied himself in a purified intellect, the Sthithaprajna. Thus, Krishna started giving him, in the very first instance, the most effective drug, Jnana. This is detailed Krishna continued His Discourse: “Arjuna! Think for from the eleventh sloka of the second chapter. This is a key awhile who you are and what you are proposing to do. You sloka for all students of the Geetha. Krishna condemns declare you know everything but yet you weep like a helpless outright two objections that were haunting Arjuna for long, woman. Your words proclaim that you are a Pundit, but saying that the destruction of the body does not mean the your acts reveal you as a simpleton. Hearing you, one would destruction of the Atma and that he is grieving for those he infer you are a (wise, liberated man); but seeing you, one need not grieve for. “Prajnaa-vaadaam-scha bhaashase: would find that you are an Ajnani (ignoramus)! Your You talk like a wise man. You say this is Dharma and the condition is disgusting, to say the least. Well, if I take you other is Adharma, as if you know how to distinguish them,” to be a Pundit, I cannot reconcile that view with your tears; said Krishna. for Pundits do not grieve over life and death. If they grieve, Here attention has to be paid to one fact. Arjuna is they are no Pundits. Pundits have the capacity to discover suffering from two types of delusion: (1) Ordinary and (2) what is fundamentally true. Those who know the secret of Out of the Ordinary. To confuse the body with oneself and the physical, and the mystery of the spiritual, such alone pine for the body as if something has happened to you is can be called Pundits. How then can they weep over either the Ordinary Delusion. To discard one’s own Dharma—(in the embodied or the disembodied? They will not forego this case, the Dharma of a Kshatriya [warrior]) as Adharma their inner calm, whatever the stress or distress.
Geetha Vahini 29 30 Geetha Vahini “The fully ignorant and the fully wise—both will have “Bhishma, Drona and the rest have come like true no grief over the living or the dead. Do you weep because soldiers and Kshatriyas to engage in battle. They do not the bodies of Bhishma and Drona will fall, or is it because weep like you. Consider that. They will never grieve or the Atma of those two will be destroyed? For the bodies, withdraw. Arjuna! This is the testing time for you, remember! do you say? Well, are tears any good? If they are, certainly, Let Me tell you this also. There was never a time when I people would have kept the corpses of their dead and revived was not. Why? There was never a time when even you and them by their weeping. No, it can never be. Immerse the all these kings and princes were not. Thath (That, the Divine) body in vessels of Amritha (Divine nectar); it cannot come is the Paramatma (Creator, universal soul), Thwam (this, back to life. Why then weep over the inevitable, the yourself) is the Jivatma (embodied being), and both were unavoidable? the same, are the same, and will be so forever. Prior to the pot, in the pot and after the pot, it was, is and will be mud.” “You might say that you are weeping for the Atma, the spiritual core. That reveals greater foolishness. Death can Arjuna was shocked into awareness and wakefulness never even approach the Atma. It is eternal, self-evident, by all this. He said, “May be You are God; may be You are pure. It is evident that you have no Atma Jnana (Atmic indestructible. I weep not for You, but for such as us: come knowledge) at all. yesterday, present today, off tomorrow. What happens to us? Please enlighten me.” “Again, for the Kshatriya, fighting is Swa-dharma. Do your duty, regardless of other considerations. You ask, ‘How One point has to be carefully noticed here. Thath, that can I cause the death of Bhishma in war?’ But they have all is, the Godhead is Nithyam, Eternal; everyone accepts it. come to get killed and to kill. You are not killing them in But Thwam, the individual too is Godhead! (Asi). It too is their homes. Of course, it is Adharma to kill them in their eternal, though it cannot be grasped so easily or so quickly. homes, but on the battlefield, how can it be against Dharma? So, Krishna elaborates this and says, “Arjuna! you too are I am sorry you have not got this much of Viveka (wisdom). eternal as the Absolute. Seen apart from the limitations, the “It is enough. Get up and get ready for the fray. Why Individual is the Universal. Prior to the appearance of the slide to the ground under the weight of all this useless ego? jewel, there was just gold; during the existence of the jewel, The Lord is the Cause of all, not you. There is a Higher there is just gold; and after the name-form of the jewel has Power that moves everything. Know this and bend your gone, the gold persists. The Atma persists in the same way, will to it. body or no body.
Geetha Vahini 31 32 Geetha Vahini “Though it is associated with the body, the Atma is unaffected by the Gunas and the Dharmas; that is to say, it has no qualities and characteristics. You are unaffected by the changes that the body undergoes when you grow from the infant to the boy, from the boy into the youth, from the youth to the middle-aged man and thence to the old man. You persist, in spite of all this. It is the same when the body is destroyed, the Atma persists. So the hero will not pine for the change called death,” Krishna said this with such emphasis that the chariot shook!
Geetha Vahini 34 Geetha Vahini (intellect) somehow manages to keep some points in its hold. But it too is destroyed when death comes to the body. At one stroke, all is forgotten. Memory is the function of the intellect, not the Atma. “Now consider this: You cannot now tell exactly where you were on a definite day, ten years ago, can you? But you existed that day, ten years ago. About that there is no doubt. You dare not deny your existence then. The same is the case of the life before this which you lived, though you CHAPTER IV have no recollection how and where. The wise man is not deluded by such doubts nor agitated by them. A rjuna was still doubt-ridden. “O Lord,” he “The Atma does not die. The body does not stay. Do began, “You said that the bodily changes are you think that your grief at their possible death will make like the stages of wakefulness, dream and the Atma of your opponents happy? That is an insane sleep. But we do not forget our experiences when we awake thought. The Atma does not derive joy or grief, whatever from deep sleep. The experiences of previous births are happens or does not happen. Let the senses keep to their destroyed in memory by the incident called ‘death.’” Krishna places. There is no reason to fear. It is only when they start replied that it was not possible to recall to memory all contacts with objects, that the twin distractions, joy and experiences, but it was possible to recall some. For the grief, get produced. When you hear someone defaming you, Atma persisted, though the vehicle changed. you feel anger and grief, but no such agitation can take place if the words do not fall on your ears. The object-ward Arjuna then shifted to another point, a point which movement of the senses is the cause of grief and its twin, pesters many besides Arjuna. That is why Krishna says, joy. “Dheerasthathra na muhyathi,” “the Dheera (wise man) is not deluded by this.” He does not say Arjuna should not be “It is like heat and cold. When it is the cold season, deluded by this. He intends to teach all wavering minds. you crave for warmth and in the hot season you crave for Krishna solves every doubt as soon as it arises. He said, coolness. The sense-object contact is exactly like this. So “Arjuna, while passing through the three stages, Buddhi long as the world is there, objective contact cannot be
Geetha Vahini 35 36 Geetha Vahini avoided. So long as the burden of previous births is there, Bearing all, with analytic discrimination—that is the type of the joy-grief complex cannot be avoided. Still, one can Sahana that will yield good result.” master the art, the discipline, the secret of avoiding them or (Viveka is the word used for such discrimination. It bearing them without bother. means the capacity to recognise what is called the “Aagamaapaayina” nature of the objective world; that is “Of what use is it to wait till the waves are silenced, to say, the world of objects that “come and go” and are not before you wade into the sea for a bath? They will never eternal.) cease. The wise man learns the trick of avoiding the blow “Generally, man seeks only happiness and joy. Under of the onrushing wave and the drag of the receding wave. no stress will he desire misery and grief! He treats happiness But a sea bath is essential. Some people avoid that very and joy as his closest well-wishers and misery and grief as thing because they are too idle to learn the art. Arjuna! Wear his direct enemies. This is a great mistake. When one is the armour of fortitude, of Thithiksha, and the blows of happy, the risk of grief is great. Fear of losing the happiness good and bad fortune can never harm you. will haunt the man. Misery prompts inquiry, discrimination, self-examination and fear of worse things that might happen. “Thithiksha means equanimity in the face of opposites, It awakens you from sloth and conceit. Happiness makes putting up boldly with duality. It is the privilege of the strong, you forget one’s obligations to oneself as a human being. It the treasure of the brave. The weak will be as agitated as drags man into egoism and the sins that egoism leads one peacock feathers, they are ever restless, with no fixity even to commit. Grief renders man alert and watchful. for a moment. They sway like the pendulum, this side and that; once towards joy, the next moment towards grief. “So misery is a real friend; happiness spends out the stock of merit and arouses the baser passions. So it is really “Here, some pause has to be made on one point. an enemy. Really, misery is an eye-opener. It promotes Fortitude is different from patience. Thithiksha (equanimity) thought and the task of self-improvement. It also endows is not the same as Sahana. Sahana is putting up with one with new and valuable experiences. Happiness draws a something, tolerating it, bearing it, because you have no veil over experiences that harden a person and make him other go; having the capacity to overcome it, but yet, tough. So troubles and travails are to be treated as friends, disregarding it—that is the spiritual discipline. Patiently at least; not as enemies. Only, it is best to regard both putting up with the external world of duality combined with happiness and misery as gifts of God. That is the easiest inner equanimity and peace—that is the path to Liberation. path for one’s own liberation.
Geetha Vahini 37 38 Geetha Vahini “Not to know this is the basic ignorance. A person so ought to earn victory over internal foes, rather than the ignorant is blind. Really, happiness and misery are like the external. His exploit is to conquer the twin foes of joy and blind man, who must be accompanied ever by one who grief. sees. When the blind man is welcomed, you have inevitably “Well, you might have another doubt also. Your heart to welcome the man with eyes, for, he is the constant is a nest of doubts! You might still question, what is the comrade of the blind man. So too, happiness and misery gain of victory. The gain is Immortality, let Me assure you. are inseparable. You cannot choose only one. Moreover, Things of the world cannot confer that state of Bliss. All misery highlights the value of happiness. You feel happy, that they can give is relative, not Absolute Bliss. When you by contrast with misery.” Thus said Krishna to Arjuna, to rise above joy and grief, Bliss is absolute, independent, full. teach him the insignificance of all duality. Arjuna, You are a Man among men. So you have no need of this paltry victory over worldly enemies. You deserve the Then Arjuna resumed: “Madhava (God, Lord of Bliss of Immortality.” Thus saying, Krishna began telling Universe)! What is the profit if your advice is followed and him of the science of Atma and Anatma, the discipline by if the necessary Thithiksha (equanimity) is cultivated? which one can discriminate between the two. Forbearance is perhaps the only result. There is no benefit, isn’t it?” Krishna replied, “O Son of Kunthi! The hero is the “The Atma Jnani is not bound by the results of karma. steady person who is not agitated to the slightest extent by It is only those who indulge in karma without the awareness ups and downs caused by roaring waves on the sea of life; of the Atma, (their real Self, unaffected by what they do or who does not lose the poise which has become part of his feel or think,) that do get bound. Like the person who has nature; who keeps to his schedule of spiritual discipline, learnt swimming, the Jnani can safely wade into the sea of whatever the attraction or distraction. The wise man is he, worldly activity. If you do not know swimming, but yet who is unaffected by the ever-present dualism of the enter the sea, the waters will swallow you up and death is objective world. He is the person referred to as ‘Dheera’ sure.” (wise man).” This explains why Krishna taught Arjuna the key science “Dhee” means “Buddhi”; it is the quality that makes a of Atma Jnana. The Atma does not kill, nor does it die. person a “Purusha” or perfect Man. It is not the dress or Those who believe that it kills or dies are unaware of its the moustache that marks out the “man.” Manhood comes nature. The Atma of Arjuna does not kill, the Atma of with the rejection of the dual. To deserve the status, he Bhishma or Drona does not die, the Atma of Krishna does
Geetha Vahini 39 40 Geetha Vahini not prompt! These are just phases of the cause-consequence afraid to take arms against such stalwarts. A Kshatriya finds duality. The Atma cannot be the cause or consequence of his duty fulfilled when he upholds the cause of Dharma, in any karma. It is Nir-vikara, incapable of change. spite of all odds. That is the path of progress. “There are six forms of modulation or modification: “Kshatham means ‘Dukham’ (sorrow), and a originating, existing, growing, altering, declining, getting Kshatriya is he who saves beings from sorrow. A chance destroyed. These are the Shad-vikaras. Originating or like this to wage a war on behalf of Dharma against the Janma is when it ‘was not’ and later, ‘is.’ When it ‘is’ and forces of Adharma comes but rarely to man. You have been becomes ‘is not,’ it is called ‘maranam’ or death. Janma blessed as a Kshatriya to take part in this Dharmayuddha. happens to organic beings, not inorganic things. But the Just imagine how much merit you will acquire by the service Atma has no organs, it is Nir-avayava. The Atma is not to the world, which you are set to do now. The war that is born and so how can it die? Whom does it kill? It is unborn, waged to establish Shanthi and Soukhya (peace and plenty) eternal. in the world is referred to as Dharmayuddha, and this is just such a struggle, where Justice is bound to win. “Just as a person discards old clothes and wears new ones, the dehi (dweller in the body) discards one body and “The Kauravas have desisted from no sin, no injustice dons another. The body is to the individual what the clothes and no vice. They insulted elders, deserted the virtuous, are to the body. If you understand the real nature of the defamed the chaste, and wounded the self-respect of the Atma, then you would not give way to grief. All the weapons good. Countless are their misdeeds. Now, the moment for that you wield can harm but the material body. They cannot retribution has come. They are about to answer for all their harm the modificationless Atma. Know this as truth and crimes. Just at this hour, if you behave like a poltroon, you renounce this despondency. bring dishonour to your parents, your brothers and indeed to the entire Kshatriya caste. “The foremost duty of a Kshatriya is to stay on the side of Dharma and destroy Adharma. Consider your good “You imagine that it is a sin to engage in war. That is a fortune! You have on this battlefield worthy foemen like great error. The sin, on the other hand, lies in avoiding the Bhishma and others. This same Bhishma fought in the past chance to destroy the wicked, in prolonging the agony of with his own Guru, the Brahmin, who taught him all the arts, the virtuous. Give up your Dharma now…and you run the the great Parasurama himself, in order, primarily, to carry risk of falling into perdition. Hold fast to it, and you are out his Kshatriya duty. And now you, like a coward, are untouched by sin. Be of fixed mind. Do not give way to
Geetha Vahini 41 42 Geetha Vahini either one or the other among all the dualities of the world.” karma) has no such. That is the difference between the two. From the 31st Sloka of this chapter, Krishna has spoken of When karma is done with a view to the gain therefrom, one this Swadharmanishta, in eight slokas. has to suffer the loss, the pain, and even the punishment. But Nishkama Karma frees you from all these. One should engage in activity, with a mind steady in the midst of fortune, good and bad. This was what Krishna “Desire the fruits of karma, and you get born again advised in the 37th sloka. The 39th is a transitional verse for and again, caught up in that desire. Give up that desire, you after speaking of “Esha thebhihithaa saamkhya” (I have are liberated from the flux. The practice of this type of described to you the Saamkhya arguments), Krishna says renunciation ends the state of bondage. The main point is that He will go on to teach him the Yoga Buddhi or Buddhi to stick to the goal. The goal is karma, not Karmaphala Yoga and asked him to listen with care. (Fruit of action). Let me tell you that the desire or the fruit When the desire to attain the fruit of action is renounced of one’s acts is an indication of Rajo Guna (passion), which with full intellectual awareness, then, it becomes what Krishna does not befit you. Perhaps you will prefer to remain inactive. calls, “Buddhiyogam.” The intellect has to be purified and Well, that is an indication of Thamo Guna (dullness, trained. Otherwise, it is impossible to give up attachment to ignorance)! It is even worse than Rajo Guna.” The Lord the fruits of action and to continue doing things, as either has laid down four commands: the first one a “do” and the duty or dedication. Such a purified intellect is named “Yoga other three “don’ts.” The first is insisting on the cultivation Buddhi.” Cultivate it and then, through it, liberate yourself of strength, the rest requiring the avoidance of weakness. from the bondage of karma. Really speaking, you, the true you are above and beyond karma. Of course, it is not Arjuna alone that got such advice. The whole of mankind needs it. Arjuna is only the You might say that you will desist from karma rather representative “Man.” Students of the Geetha must learn than practise the difficult discipline of renouncing the fruits this lesson first: that the Geetha is primarily for every seeker. thereof. But that is impossible. No, Karma is inevitable. One has to do some karma or other. Not for a single moment Another point to be noted is this: Geetha is addressed can one free oneself from karma “nahi kaschith to Man, not to birds and beasts or to the gods or devathas. kshanamapi” says Krishna, in the third Chapter of the Man performs acts prompted by the desire for the fruits Geetha. thereof. If the act does not yield fruit, he will not do the act “Arjuna! Every karya (deed) or karma (activity) has a at all. Profit, gain, reward, result—these man seeks. But this beginning and an end. But Nishkama Karma (desireless rule does not apply to those who take the Geetha in their
Geetha Vahini 43 44 Geetha Vahini hands to drink the nectar of the Lord’s Message. Not all do yearn for the nectar. If you do so, it is evident that you aspire for eternal joy, eternal liberation. Then you must pay the price, the giving up of the desire for the fruit of action, and dedicate everything at the Feet of the Lord.
Geetha Vahini 46 Geetha Vahini This is a great blunder. The Lord has said in the Geetha, “refuse the fruit” (maa phaleshu), that is to say: the deed yields results, but the doer should not desire the result, or do it with the result in view. If Krishna’s intention was to say that the doer has no right for the fruit, He would have said, “It is fruitless” na phaleshu, (na, meaning no). So, if you desist from karma, you will be transgressing the Lord’s Command. That will be a serious mistake. When man has a right for engaging in karma, he has a CHAPTER V right also for the fruit; no one can deny this or refuse his right. But the doer can, out of his own free will and I determination, refuse to be affected by the result, whether f you have an eye on the fruits of your actions, favourable or unfavourable. The Geetha shows the way: you are liable to be affected by worry, anxiety and “Do—and deny the consequence.” The desire for the result restlessness. The question may arise: if the fruits of your action is a sign of Rajo Guna. The giving up of have to be given up, how can one manage to live? But why action since you cannot benefit by the fruit is a sign of this weakness of heart, this nervousness? He who has Thamo Guna (dullness, ignorance). To engage oneself in assured, “Yoga-kshemam vahamyaham” (I will absolutely karma, to know that the result will follow, and yet, not to be take care of your worldly and spiritual needs), will certainly attached to it or getting concerned with it—that is the sign look after that. He will give the wherewithal and the means. of Sathwa Guna (pure). After all, you have to consider, “Is a happy life important or is liberation from the circle of life and death more important? The Karma Yogi who has learnt this secret of “Karma Happy living is only of short duration. The joy of liberation combined with Phalathyaga” should have Samabuddhi is eternal, unshakeable. (equanimity), more than Sangabuddhi (mind attached to the world). For, the Sangabuddhi draws him into attachments On this point many commentators have exercised their and entanglements. “This karma is mine, its results are due intelligence and written differently. Many have said that the to my endeavours. I am the person entitled to it,” such are giving up of Phala or fruit is advised because there is no the thoughts which bind the doer. Krishna advises that one right or authority for the doer to desire the fruit. should rise above this Sangabuddhi. He declared that
Geetha Vahini 47 48 Geetha Vahini Samathwam (unruffled equanimity) is the genuine Yoga. draw from the objective world are weeds, the crop is the (Samathwam yogamuchyathe). attachment to God. The mind is a bundle of wishes. Unless these wishes are removed by their roots, there is no hope of In the second chapter, Krishna has made clear, in a destroying the mind, which is a great obstacle in the path of general way, four principal points: the Saranagathi principle, spiritual progress. When the yarn that comprises the cloth the Sankhya teaching (path of knowledge), the Yoga attitude is taken out, one by one, what remains of the cloth? Nothing. and the Sthithaprajna (steady wisdom individual) nature. We The mind is made of the warp and woof of wishes. And have noted the first three already. Now about the fourth: when mind vanishes, the Sthithaprajna is made. Krishna taught Arjuna the nature and characteristics of So, the first thing to be conquered is Kama, the demon the Sthithaprajna (steady wisdom individual) when Arjuna of desire. For this it is unnecessary to wage a huge war. It is questioned him. Arjuna prayed “O Kesava!” and when that also unnecessary to use pleasing words to persuade the appellation was used, Krishna smiled. For He knew then desire to disappear. Desires will not disappear for fear of that Arjuna had understood His splendour. Do you ask how? the one or for favour of the other. Desires are objective, Well, what does Kesava mean? It means, “He who is Brahma, they belong to the category of the “seen.” With the conviction Vishnu, Shiva, the Thrimurthi (Trinity).” Through Krishna’s that, “I am the seer only, not the seen,” the Sthithaprajna Grace, Arjuna had reached that stage of realisation. releases himself from attachment. By this means he conquers desire. You must watch the working of the mind, from When Arjuna prayed that Kesava must tell him the true outside it. You should not get involved in it. That is the characteristics of a Sthithaprajna, He replied, “Partha! He meaning of this discipline. will be free from all desire. He will be stable in the knowledge and awareness of the Atma only.” The faculty of the mind is as a strong current of electricity. It has to be watched from a distance and not Now, there are two processes in this: To give up all the contacted or touched. Touch it, you are reduced to ashes. promptings of desire in the mind is the negative process; to So too, contact and attachment give the chance for the mind implant joy, ever-present joy therein, is the positive aspect. to ruin you. The farther you are from it, the better. By skilful The negative process is to remove all the seedlings of wrong methods, you have to make the best use of it, for your own and evil from the mind. The positive process is to grow, in welfare. the field cleansed thus, the crop of attachment to God! The cultivation of the crop you need is positive, the plucking of The bliss which the Sthithaprajna is immersed in does the weeds is the negative stage. The pleasures the senses not arise from external objects, he has no need of them
Geetha Vahini 49 50 Geetha Vahini either. Ananda is in everyone, as part of his very nature. need have no fear, for they become serpents with the fangs Those with pure consciousness find the highest bliss in the removed.” But there is still danger from thoughts and realisation of their own reality, the Atma. That joy is Swa- impulses which draw you outwards. Desire has no limit, it sampaadyam (self-earned, so to say). It is known only to can never be satiated. the individual, it is self-evident. So along with the mastery of the senses, one must Since Arjuna had not known this, Krishna had to clarify establish mastery of the mind also. That is the sign of a it in simple terms in the 56th, 57th and 58th slokas. Joy or Sthithaprajna (a steady-wisdom individual), and not a grief can be met with in three forms: Aadhyaathmika Gathaprajna (a no-wisdom individual). Where does the (sufferings due to mind, psyche), Aadibhouthika (sufferings Gathaprajna go? To perdition and nowhere else. due to elements) and Aadidaivika (suffering due to demi- The upward path, the higher stage—that is for the gods). It is well known that sins bring grief as a retribution Sthithaprajna. Of these two masteries, if the mind is subdued, and meritorious deeds bring joy as reward. So advice is that alone is enough. It is not necessary then to conquer the given to avoid sins and perform meritorious deeds. But the external senses. If the mind has no attachment with objects, Sthithaprajna (a steady-wisdom individual) knows neither the senses have nothing to cling on to. They perish by the pain of grief or the thrill of joy. He is not repulsed by inanition. Love and hate are both starved out of existence. one or attracted by the other. He will not retreat before pain The bonds of the objective world are cut, though the senses or run forward towards pleasure. Only those who are ignorant may yet be affected by it. For him who has been blessed by of the Atma will exult or droop, when stricken with joy or an awareness of the Atma, how can anything worldly bring grief. grief or joy? The Sthithaprajna will be ever engaged in Manana, or As the stars fade into invisibility when the sun rises, so contemplation and rumination. He is called Muni (One who too, when the Sun of Knowledge or Jnana rises, grief, has controlled the mind and is established in silence). His agitation and ignorance vanish. intellect is steady, be-cause the senses do not harry it. One point has to be understood here. Conquest of the senses is Man has three chief instruments: the mind, the intellect, essential for sadhana (spiritual practice); but that is not all. and the senses. It is when these three work in unison and So long as the objective world continues to attract the mind, co-operate with one another that either ‘immersal in the flux’ one cannot claim complete success. That is why Krishna or ‘liberation in the knowledge of the Atma,’ is realised. says, “Arjuna! Establish mastery over the senses. Then you Krishna anticipated that Arjuna will be puzzled to know what
Geetha Vahini 51 52 Geetha Vahini will happen “when which operates with which.” So He Dehasthithi, from the Atma conscious-ness stage you fall himself provided the answer. “Arjuna,” He said, “when the into the body consciousness stage. mind co-operates with the senses, you enter into the flux called samsara (change). When it subordinates itself to the This is what happens to the ordinary man. He sleeps intellect, you attain the knowledge of the Atma. One path in the Atma stage and wakes into the Dehasthithi. The leads to Samsara-praapthi (worldly fulfillment); the other, Sthithaprajna’s case is different. He sleeps in the Deha- to Atma-praapthi (fulfillment of the soul). The intellect must consciousness and wakes in the awareness of the Atma. He resolve, the mind must carry out the resolution so made. will not awake even by mistake, in the sensory world, the That is the correct procedure.” world where the ordinary man is most vigilant! This is the inner meaning. It is far from the literal meaning, which, if The Indriyas or senses have to be fully destroyed. That is the hallmark of a Sthithaprajna. So when all beings taken as true, would entitle thieves, watchmen and others to are experiencing night, the Sthitha-prajna would keep himself the name Sthithaprajna! For all these keep awake at nights awake. When all beings are awake, the Sthithaprajna would and sleep during the day! Only those who have given up be asleep. The literal meaning of this is that what is night for traces of desire and become mere instruments can achieve one is day for the other. But that would sound absurd. It Shanthi (peace). Krishna ends the description of the would mean the Sthithaprajna is a person who sleeps during Sthithaprajna with an emphasis on “Kaama naa-thyaga” the day and keeps awake at night. the giving up of Desire. The inner meaning of this statement is very profound. To man sorrowing on the battlefield of life, bewildered Ordinary men are vigilant in affairs that concern the senses by the attractions and the distractions, not knowing where that arise out of this world. Wakefulness for them is the to turn and which road to take, Madhava taught this Sankhya care they bestow on worldly pursuits. But the Sthithaprajna Yoga (II chapter). The other chapters are like commentaries is unconcerned with these very things. He is, so to say, on the teaching in this chapter. “Arjuna! Prepare yourself asleep. What does sleep mean? It means the happiness resulting from inactivity of the senses. And vigilance? It for giving up the mind, for being merged in your own Self. means yielding to the senses, and catering to them. When Withdraw the mind from the sabda (sound), sparsa (touch), ordinary men are pursuing the senses and their demands, roopa (form), rasa (taste), gandha (smell) categories, the the Sthithaprajna is asleep. This can also be put in other Five Elements. Then you become a Sthithaprajna,” said words: Forget the Atmasthithi and you relapse into Krishna. In this Second chapter He elaborated (in the 11th
Geetha Vahini 53 54 Geetha Vahini to the 38th sloka) on the Atma Thathwa (Atma Principle), in a simple easily understandable style. Then from the 39th to the 75th sloka, He taught the Dharma-Karma (righteous action) attitude that is essential for attaining the Godhead, an attitude that is based on the Karma Yoga (Yoga of action) which itself is embodied in the Samatha-buddhi (equanimity), already prescribed.
Geetha Vahini 56 Geetha Vahini attachment and engage in acts, as if they are each a Yajna, sacrifice dedicated to the Lord.” Krishna taught Arjuna the origins of karma, the roots from where the urge to do karma sprouts and grows. He taught them so clearly that Arjuna’s heart was really moved and modified. “The Vedas emanated from God; karmas emanated from the Vedas; from karma originated Yajna; from Yajna, Rain; from Rain grew food; from food came all living beings. This is the cycle that has to be accepted and honoured. CHAPTER VI “Consider this, O Arjuna, I have no need to do any karma, no not anywhere in the three worlds. I am under no I compulsion. Still I am ever engaged in karma. Think of this. n seventeen verses, from the 56th to the 72nd, If I desist, the world will be no more. Have steady faith in Krishna described in the second chapter the the Atma; then dedicate all acts of yours to Me: with no characteristics of the Sthithaprajna, and the desire for the fruit thereof, no egoism and no sense of excellence of that stage. Then, saying that He Himself had possession or pride, engage in battle,” said Krishna. established Jnana Yoga for the Sankhyas, and Karma Yoga for the Yogis, as means of attaining Liberation, He spoke of If the wheel of Creation is to move smooth, each one the importance of karma. has to keep on doing karma. Whoever he is, he cannot get round this obligation. Even he who has achieved the highest Everyone has to bow to the demands of Nature and Jnana has to observe this rule. Eating and drinking, intake engage himself in karma. It is inevitable. Therefore, Krishna and release of breath—these too are karmas. Who can exist said, “Do the Karthavya Karmas, karma that is your without these acts? bounden duty. Being engaged in karma is to be preferred to not being so engaged. If you desist from karma, the task of “You derive benefit from the world and from the living becomes difficult, nay, impossible. community and so some activity on your part is their due. “The karmas that do not bind by consequence are This Brahmaanda (Supreme Bliss), this Viswa (creation), those referred to as Yajna (sacrifice). All the rest are is really speaking a huge workshop. Every human being is a bondage-producing ones. Therefore, O Arjuna, give up all limb in this organisation. The limb is allotted a task in
Geetha Vahini 57 58 Geetha Vahini accordance with its structure and it must find its fulfilment happen? Because, the Sun bears many million times this in doing that particular work. Whatever work one has been heat at that distance, is it not? Now if the Sun feels that it allotted has to be done as an offering to God. There is no will not put up with all that fire and becomes cool, what will single thing in the Universe that does not engage itself in this happen to mankind? Again, if I desist from karma, this vast great task. Plant and insect, stone and stump, wind and Viswa Karma of working in and through this Universe, rain, heat and cold, if each of these does not work as per imagine what will be the fate? That is why I am engaged in Plan, the world cannot subsist. The Sun and the Moon carry karma, remember. Not that I derive any profit thereby, or on their routine tasks. Wind and fire have to perform their get any good, or any fruit. duties without demur. If the earth and sun refuse to do the allotted duties what is to happen to the world? So, there is “Almost everyone in the world is bound by the rule of no one who is karma-less, but yet with body! It is only karma. But people are so immersed in ignorance that they when each performs his task without fail, and with care, are unaware of their own moral or intellectual status and of that the wheel will move quick and smooth. the secrets of karma. Such can be saved only by being inspired by the example of the great. That is why the Jnani “You may wonder why Jnanis (liberated persons) has to be engaged in activity. He has to remove the sloth should still do karma; not only you, but many others may and delusion of ordinary men. So all have to obey the rule be worried at that statement. Well, people usually follow the of karma, without any deviation.” ideal set by those in higher levels. Their acts form the basis of Dharma for all. If Jnanis are inactive, how are ordinary Does the aeroplane stay on above, denouncing the earth mortals to save themselves? They have no guide and so below? Those who have earned the right to travel in it cannot they lose themselves in the easy paths of sensory pleasure. fly towards it and into it! Therefore, to take them in, it has The duty of the wise is to foster the right and to practise it to come down at the places where they gather by previous before others, so that they too may be prompted to follow, arrangement, and then soar high into the sky with them. So drawn by the hope of becoming as contented and as joyful too, though the Jnani has no desire or urge to do karma, he as they are. The wise have to do and get done, see and comes down into the region of karma and helps those who show, so that the rest might be persuaded to follow the would not have otherwise put their talents into proper use. example set by them. Even great personages like Janaka performed Dharma- “Arjuna! pay attention to just one fact! How warm is karmas with this view. Aswapathi too did likewise, to save your body now? It may be about 98 degrees. How did it the rest from sheer idleness or wickedness.
Geetha Vahini 59 60 Geetha Vahini Then, in reply to another question of Arjuna, Krishna Myself) the excellence of Jnana Yoga has been similarly said, “Kama (desire) is the root cause of all evil” and He extolled in many other contexts also in the Geetha. elaborated on its nature, cause and cure. “He who is bound That is why Jnana Yoga is believed to be the most fruitful by the Deha-atma-buddhi (the false idea that he is just this of all spiritual sadhanas. All Sastras find their fulfilment in body and nothing more) can never hope to conquer karma. Jnana alone. Dhyanam (meditation) is just the contemplation One must acquire the Brahma-atma-buddhi (the awareness of the Jnana Swaroopa, which is one’s real nature. All are in that he is just Brahman and nothing less) in order to be sure you, you are in all. You have to get this conviction fixed in of victory. All acts must be performed in the spirit of your consciousness, by means of analysis, discrimination dedication to the Lord. The Universe must be identified and intellectual exploration. You have to isolate and dismiss with the Form of Vishnu, the Universal Transcendent.” from the consciousness the impressions of the senses, the In this chapter, three important subjects have been mind, the intelligence, etc. These have nothing to do with clarified: (1) Everyone has to do karma for if this is not the Atma, which you really are. The Atma is unaffected by done, the world will come to nought. (2) The karma of the any subject or object. Even if the senses, mind, intelligence, great is the ideal that the rest have to keep in view. (3) Almost etc. are inactive, that inactivity will not affect the Atma! To all in the world are bound by the obligation of karma. know the Atma as such an entity, unaffected and unattached, is the secret of Jnana. Krishna most graciously made Arjuna imbibe these lessons. Not satisfied with this, Krishna told him that Jnana Every single act of yours must be carried out with this is the final goal and gain of karma. Jnana is the treasure that Jnana (wisdom) as its background. That awareness of the is won by man’s efforts to purify the mind, and to earn the Atma will guide you in both the out-moving and in-drawing Grace of God. Jnana not merely grants Ananda but is itself paths, the Pravritthi Marga and the Nivritthi Marga. It will not the seat of Ananda. Thus, He initiated him into Jnana Marga, block action but fill it with purpose and meaning. It will build the path of Jnana. up faith and moral life, it will take man to the realm of deliverance along the road of Nishkama Karma, the This subject is carried on till the fifth Chapter. Jnana renunciation of the fruit of action, and not of action itself. Yoga shines as a precious jewel amidst the Teachings of Bhagavad Geetha Sastra. Krishna declared “Nahi Jnanena For the achievement of Liberation, Jnana is the direct sadrisam pavithramiha vidyathe” (nothing as holy as Jnana road. Therefore, it is declared to be incomparably sacred. is known here)! Even later, in the 7th chapter, He has said, And, naturally, it follows that Ignorance is indubitably the “Jnani thwathmaivame matham” (I consider the Jnani as most despicable. “See the Universal in the Particular; see
Geetha Vahini 61 62 Geetha Vahini the Particular in the Universal; that is the essence of Jnana,” The reference to Surya also merits consideration. The said Krishna. “All Kshetras (bodies, fields) know only one people of Bharath are intimately associated with the Sun- single Kshetrajna (knower of the field or body). And, who god. The heroes of Bharath, the Kshathriyas, are from the is that? The Atma, that is to say, you yourself, your own beginning attached to Surya. Even for ordinary men and self! Know this and you become a Jnani. So realise that the women, Surya is so highly sacred that He has been raised Atma is Paramatma (creator, universal soul); that is the to the status of the Great Guru. The sacred scriptures and Vijnana (wisdom).” Krishna, who is All-knowing, began to legends of India have not assigned a status of similar glory teach Arjuna this Yoga, in order to cast off all doubt from to anyone else. It is a unique position that Surya occupies. his mind. Why, for the whole world, the Sun is the visible manifestation of the Lord. And the Sun is the source of Time. Surya is the “Arjuna! I taught this sacred Jnana Yoga to Surya, then father of Time (Kala) as the Sastras declare. The Sun limits it was handed down from one generation to another till Manu and regulates the number of years each one lives. The Sun and Ikshvaku and from them, Rajarshis came to learn it. diminishes every day a fraction of the allotted span. So the Then it (got) lost in the world. That ever-existing Yoga had Sun is the supreme arbiter, the maker of man’s destiny. to be restored to the world, and so I had to come.” Whether one wills or not, every deed of his is performed You will not fail to notice the discrepancy of the Yoga under His auspices and dedicated to Him. being described as ever-existing and the statement that it Above all, consider the service the Sun does to this was lost! Of course, the statement was not made without world! That is within the daily experience of all. Everyone is thought. The indestructible is here spoken of as having been witness for that. The Sun is the source of all life, plant and destroyed! It is called indestructible or Avyaya for two animal, upon this planet. Without His rays, it will be a reasons. Its origin is the Veda, which is free from decline. desolate waste. He draws up into the sky the waters of seas This Yoga on account of passage of time, neglect and disuse, and lakes, and from the clouds He pours rain on the crops. was forgotten. That is to say, it disappeared, it was lost to He is ever the Dharmadevatha (God of Righteousness), view, it declined. The statement does not mean anything scattering His rays equally on all. more. Bringing it into life means, bringing it once again into use, not creating it ab initio. “Lost to view” is the sense in Surya is the great Thyagi for unequalled renunciation. which the word “destroyed” is used in a general way. That He is the great Yogi. Without a second’s thought of His is how you have to interpret it, for the Lord will never devise own glory or of rest, He performs His Duty without thought a thing that will suffer “destruction.” of reward. He is humble and steady in work. The service
Geetha Vahini 63 64 Geetha Vahini He does is something no one else can fulfil. The happiness healthy, no one is surprised or worried. But grief and sorrow He contributes is something no one else can confer. But He are strange to his makeup. They are the result of a delusion has no pretensions to pride. He moves above unconcerned that has overwhelmed his nature. So people get worried with the consequences of His energising mission of service. and they set about finding out how he got so deluded. Imagine the patience with which the Sun puts up with The Sun is teaching us that when one is oneself, there all that extreme heat for the sake of the world and of will be no exhaustion or elation, no disgust or pride. The humanity. It is He who keeps the human body warm and task of Surya is not something imposed from outside and comfortable. This material body is so full of energy and taken up under compulsion. That is why it is performed intelligence on account of the Solar Energy that it imbibes. systematically and smoothly. He is also exhorting mankind If the Sun is idle for a moment, the world will be consumed to use the time that He creates and allots, fully and fruitfully, in flames. Instead, He is fostering the world. He feels it as not merely for living comfortably and safely, but for living a His Mission, His Purpose, and not as His Service. moral and elevating life, worthy of the destiny that is man’s. Now, you can realise why the Geetha was first taught by the It is only in the karma that is your very nature that you Lord to the Sun. He is the great Karma Yogi, the great can have fortitude. If it is just an assumed duty, you will Nishkama Karma Yogi. find it difficult to put up with the troubles and travails. Krishna is now teaching this indestructible Geetha Sastra Assumed karma is called Asahaja Karma and karma that is to Arjuna, the representative of Man at the crossroads. He the expression of one’s genuine self is Sahaja Karma. Now, chose him for he has the same excellences, is it not? Reflect Sahaja Karma will sit light and Asahaja Karma will always on that for a moment. If Arjuna was not a vessel endowed be a burden. Asahaja Karma will induce conceit, or the feeling with such virtues and splendour, Krishna would not have “I am the doer”; so it will result in exhaustion or elation, decided to use him as the recipient of the Geetha. The Lord disgust or pride. will not give gifts to the undeserving. Arjuna had the qualities Think of this one point; when a man is well, no one that were needed for receiving the teaching and he was will inquire about his health. But if he is stricken with illness chosen. or sorrow, everyone will inquire why and bombard him with anxious queries. Why this anxiety? Man is fundamentally happy and healthy. His nature is joy. That is his Sahajaswabhava (innate quality). So when he is happy and
Geetha Vahini 66 Geetha Vahini (country), the Deha (body) of Lord, is protected by the Dharma it wears; it also gives it beauty and joy; it is the Pithambara, the Holy Apparel of Bharath. It guards both honour and dignity; protects from chill and lends charm to life. Dharma preserves the self-respect of this land. As clothes maintain the dignity of the person who wears them, so, Dharma is the measure of the dignity of a people. Not only this country, every single thing in the world, has its own special Dharma or uniqueness of Duty, and CHAPTER VII Nature. Each has its distinctive clothes! Dharma rules the group and the individual. Take the five elements, the components of Prapancha (created world). Of these, water “ When decline descends on the Dharma which has has movement and cold as its Dharma. Combustion and been laid down, I incarnate as the Naraakaara, light are the Dharma of fire. Each of the five has its unique from the state of Niraakaara, in order to revive it Dharma. Humanity for man, animality for animals, these and protect it and save the Good from fear,” said Krishna. guard them from decline. How can fire be fire, if it has no Now this statement might cause some misgiving. You may power of combustion and light? It must manifest the Dharma ask: Will not common people, then, conclude that Dharma to be itself. When it loses that, it becomes a lifeless bit of is something liable to decline and decay? Will they not charcoal. condemn Dharma as neither Nithya (unaffected by time) nor Sathya (truth)? Similarly, man too has some natural characteristics that Well, you will grasp the importance of the task of are his very life-breath. They are also called Shakthis or protecting Dharma only when you consider its origin and Abilities. They can be identified as ‘men’ only so long as purpose. God created this Jagath (world) on His own these abilities are found in them. If they are lost, they are no initiative and He ordained various codes for its upkeep and longer ‘men.’ To preserve and foster such qualities and smooth running. There were rules of correct conduct for abilities, certain modes of behaviour, lines of thought, are every being. These form the Dharma. laid down. Dharma will not decline if these Aacharas The word Dharma is derived from the root, Drh, (discipline) and Vicharas (discrimination) are kept up. meaning ‘wear’; Dharma is that which is worn. Desa Dharma is not imported from somewhere outside, nor can
Geetha Vahini 67 68 Geetha Vahini it be removed. It is your own genuine nature, your It becomes weak when it is taken out of “practice” and uniqueness. It is the thing which makes a man out of an thrown on the sands of words. Sathya (truth) is a matter of animal. How to observe Dharma? By being ‘yourself.’ If a speech, it gets strength when it is practised in speech. It is thing breaks loose from its Dharma and behaves as the whim difficult to practise it in action. “Strength” has two meanings dictates, then it is doing Adharma (unrighteousness). here: Animal strength and Dharmic strength. Bheema had physical strength, but as his elder brother, Dharmaja, was This Sahajadharma (innate or natural dharma) of man by his side, Bheema’s strength became Dharmic. The was overpowered in course of time. Those who supported Pandavas were saved by their adherence to Dharmic it, encouraged it and derived joy from it, declined. So, in strength. But for that, they would have suffered defeat even common parlance, it was said to have been ‘destroyed,’ in the very beginning. The Pandavas, without Dharmaja, though it is something that cannot be destroyed. It is only whatever their resources, would have been an easy match like the weed overpowering the crop. So the ‘establishment for their opponents. Just ponder over that. How were the of Dharma’ is only weeding the field. Now in this Iron Age Kauravas destroyed, in spite of their vastly superior of Kali Yuga, Dharma has become a mere matter of words. resources? They did not have Dharmic Strength! All that Dharma is not just the magical manipulation of words. This they could rely on was sheer animal strength. The day when must be clearly understood. What has to be spoken is Truth. Dharmaja and Bheema, those who had Dharmic strength, What has to be acted is Dharma. moved into the forest, Adharma penetrated into the land of the Kauravas. “Sathyam Vada (speak truth), Dharam Chara (act righteously)”—has been the clarion call of the Upanishads, So, the Dharma that has now been exiled into the forest the repositories of Indian culture. These glorious teachings has to be restored to the villages and towns in order to have been forgotten today. It has been turned upside down, establish plenty, prosperity and peace to the world. From in fact. “Dharmam vada,” (Speak Dharma) is the order of the reign of Adharma, the world has to enter the era of the day! This is the first step in the decline of Dharma, this Dharma. Special effort is called for when you cultivate a descent from deed to word, and belief that a thing is done crop, no effort is necessary when weeds and wild grass are when it is only uttered! This is Adharma, in fact. allowed to grow. The valuable crop of Sahaja Dharma has But that which is not practised cannot possess strength. to be cultivated with all care and attention. When Dharma is The crocodile’s strength depends upon its being in water. practised, Adharma will decline by itself. No special exertion The strength of Dharma depends upon its being practised. is needed for putting it out of action. Therefore,
Geetha Vahini 69 70 Geetha Vahini Dharmasthaapana means in this present context the growth purpose that Krishna selected Arjuna as the vehicle and of the practice of Dharma. showered on him His Grace. What does it mean when people say, “The Sun has Once, while Krishna was conversing intimately with set”? Only, “It is not visible to us.” So too, simply because Arjuna, He made this statement: (Note the overpowering Dharma is not evident, you cannot say it has gone out of Grace that Krishna showed!)—“Arjuna, You are My closest existence. How can it go out of existence? If it goes, it Bhaktha (devotee); not only that, you are My dearest Friend. cannot be Truth or Dharma. Dharma, since it is associated I have no friend so dear as you are. That is the reason why with Truth, is indestructible. To make the Dharma that has I taught you this supreme, secret Teaching.” become hidden visible once again, that is real Reflect on this. Many in the world are only self-styled Dharmasthaapana (revival of righteousness). What Krishna Bhakthas. The Lord has not accepted them as such. To get is doing is exactly that. the title from the Lord Himself is great good fortune and Using Arjuna as an instrument, He is bringing to light that is the highest credential. The Bhaktha must melt the the codes of conduct and modes of thought which are laid heart of the Lord and get from Him the acknowledgement down as Dharma from the very beginning and once again of Bhakthi (devotion). If the title is taken by oneself, it gives enforcing their practice. This is referred to as paltry satisfaction, not genuine joy—alpathrpthi, not Dharmoddharana. He is reviving something that is lost. Aatmathrpthi. Arjuna was the only person who got the title This is not work that can be carried out by ordinary men. from the Lord Himself. So you can understand how pure- So, the Universal Basis, the Universal Lord has Himself to hearted, how deserving, was Arjuna. You might say a assume the task. He alone is Sarvasaktha (My will must hundred things about yourself. You might advance this claim prevail over all obstacles). He is teaching the world through and that. But you must show acknowledgement from the Arjuna. Lord. Without that all your talk is empty boast. Bhakthi must be won by implicit obedience. But that alone is not If Arjuna was an individual like others, he could not be sufficient. That is why Krishna used the word, Mithra, the recipient and transmitter of this great Teaching. So, you (Friend) also. The Friend has no fear, that makes him a must infer that Arjuna was really a great man. He is a hero more perfect recipient. who has defeated not merely the outer foes, but even the inner ones. Weak hearts cannot grasp the Geetha and put it Now we shall resume the trend and go back to the into practice. It is with this full knowledge and this high Geetha. When Arjuna listened to Krishna’s words, he
Geetha Vahini 71 72 Geetha Vahini developed a headful of doubts. He became agitated; not Arjuna was glad he got a chance. “Madhava! I do not only he, but all men nowadays are worried by doubts. understand your words. They confuse me so much that I Moreover, in the complex spiritual field and the field of am losing a little of the faith that I have in you. But I pray, knowledge concerning Godhead, there are two excuse me for asking this, please solve my doubt, I cannot interpretations possible: the outer and the inner. Ordinary stand it anymore.” Arjuna pleaded with folded hands. men accept the outer and those who have some experience of the Lord, seek to know the Inner. Gopala (Krishna) was glad and He asked him what the doubt was. Arjuna then said, “You said that this Yoga was As the saying goes, “like the mole in the eye, the stone taught to Surya and to Manu. Of what distant past are these in the shoe, the thorn in the foot, the faction in the home,” is two? And to which age do you belong? Did you teach them this “doubt in the brain.” When such doubts assail Arjuna, while in this body? That is unbelievable. For this body is who is the representative Man, it means they are Humanity’s only four or five years older than mine. You are not more own doubts. They can be solved only by Madhava (God), aged than that. When did You teach them without my being who is beyond and above Humanity. That is why Krishna is aware of it? And the Sun? He is greater than You, many ready by his side to remove any doubt and plant joy in the times greater. He is there from the very beginning, from a heart. past which is beyond our imagination. I cannot believe it; no, not even the most intelligent person can prove it as true. Now, what exactly is the doubt? Krishna was born at Let it be! You may say, ‘This is not the Body, and this is the end of the Dwapara Yuga. Surya and Manu are persons not the Yuga; it was while I was in another Body and during of the past. How then could these two meet Krishna? It another Yuga.’ That makes it still more strange. For how cannot be physical relationship, for many generations can anyone remember what happened in any previous birth? separate Krishna from the other two. Krishna is Arjuna’s If you say that it is possible to have the memory, then it contemporary. How did Krishna teach this Yoga to Surya? must apply to me also, is it not? The Sastras declare that To sit quietly listening to unbelievable stories is itself a sign only a few Divine beings keep such things in memory. The of poverty of intellect. Every moment, Arjuna’s uneasiness mortals cannot hold them in remembrance. Well, I may accept increased. This was observed by Krishna, who is everywhere that you are Divine. But I have to accept that Surya, the Sun and in everything. He said, “What is the cause of the is also Divine. How can two persons equal in Divine status restlessness that I notice in you? Tell Me,” and prodded teach and learn from each other? When You teach and he him with a smile. learns, he becomes Your disciple, is it not? You must then
Geetha Vahini 73 74 Geetha Vahini be taken to be superior to Surya. Let us take it to be so. I also I am reflected in Prakruthi (nature); and that does not accept that you are the Lord, God Himself. That creates diminish any of My Glory or Status. I remain as Almighty further difficulties for me. For why should God be bound and as Sarvajna as ever. I am unborn, immortal. Humans by birth and death and activity? When you assume the five- are born as a result of the merit and demerit of previous foot human form, is it not a limitation on the Limitless? births. Perhaps you think that this holds true for Avathars From that infinite limitless Universal why should God also. No. No. Yours is Karma Janma (birth due to natural incarnate as the limited particular? Howsoever I argue within means as a result of karma). Mine is Leela Janma (Divine myself, I cannot solve this doubt. Your words are meaningful birth as a play of God). Prayers of the good are the cause for you only. They do not convey any meaning to me. My of My Janma (birth). The misdeeds of the wicked are also head is confused. Give me some guidance, some convincing the cause!” reply,” prayed Arjuna. Krishna laughed within Himself, recognising that the appropriate moment had come. He said, “Arjuna! What exactly do people mean when they say the Sun has risen and the Sun has set? It is so far as their vision is concerned. That is all, is it not? The Sun does not rise, it does not set. I am also like that. I am not born, nor do I die. Men of ordinary intellect consider that I am born many times and that I do many deeds during each birth. Whenever there is the need for the uplift of the World, I become manifest assuming a Name and a Form, that is all. So I am conscious of all My appearances, all My manifestations. I am Almighty, I am Sarvajna (All knowing). Not only I, even you, know everything. But your Jnanashakthi (urge to know) is overwhelmed by Ajnana (non-knowledge, ignorance). I am Jnana (wisdom) itself and so, I know everything. When the Sun is seen in a mirror, He does not lose either his status or his glory. He is unaffected, his glory is undiminished. So
Geetha Vahini 76 Geetha Vahini It has come for a task and it is bound to accomplish it. “I shall tell you what that task is. It is protecting the Sadhus, punishing the wicked and supporting Dharma. By Sadhus, I do not mean monks and ascetics, who are indicated generally by that word. It means Sadhu Guna, goodness, uprightness, virtue; and these can be possessed by animals and even insects. Really speaking, the promotion of Sathwa Guna (purity) is the best means of fostering CHAPTER VIII Sadhus. The Avathar is the embodiment of this sacred guna and so It fosters it, wherever it is found. But since Sanyasins (ascetics, monks) are striving to earn it, they are called sadhus “ The Avathar Purushas have no merit or demerit and supposed to be specially blessed by the attention of accumulated in former births, which like ordinary the Lord. mortals, they have to pay off in this birth. Theirs is “But they are not the only Sadhus. All those who follow a Leela (divine play), a birth taken on. The goodness of the Sadachara (good conduct), who have Sadseela (good good and the wickedness of the bad provide the reasons for practices), who adhere to Sathya (truth) who yearn for the the Avathar of the Lord. For example, take the Avathar of Sannidhi (Presence) of Sarveswara (the Lord), who observe Narasimha. The merit of Prahlada and the wickedness of Saddharma, who consider Sarvajana (all) as Samaana Hiranyakasipu combined to cause it. As a result of the coming (equal); all of them are Sadhus. Such characteristics are of the Lord, the good will be happy and the bad will suffer. found among the animals and birds even. In the Ramayana, The Avathar, however, has no joy or grief, even when it is Jatayu (eagle) was saved as a result of this Guna. That is the enveloped in the body it has assumed. The Avathar is not reason why the elephant was blessed and the monkeys were constituted of the five elements; it is Chinmaya not Mrinmaya, given a chance to serve and be blessed with His Grace. The spiritual not material. It can never be disturbed by egoism or same reason prompted the Lord to bless the squirrel. A the sense of ‘mine’ and ‘thine.’ It is untouched by the delusion Sadhu is not made by a string of beads, an ochre robe and born of ignorance. Though men may mistake an Avathar as a stick in the hand. The clothes one wears and the language just human, that does not affect the nature of the embodiment. one has on the tongue do not decide who is a Sadhu and
Geetha Vahini 77 78 Geetha Vahini who is not. It is the Guna that settles it. All animals have the purpose. Nothing is for My own advancement. Those who potentiality to be good. So fostering goodness in all is the know this secret can escape birth and death,” said Krishna. best means of ensuring the welfare of the world. To feel that the Lord is away, afar, separate from you— that is called Paroksha Jnana. To feel that the Lord, who is “Next, the punishment of the wicked. Those who immanent in the Universe, is in you also as the Atman—that transgress the limits set for each type or genus of animals, is Aparoksha Jnana. If all activity is moved by the those who indulge in Akarma, Anyaya (injustice, negation) dedicatory spirit, the Chiththa (inner consciousness) of man and Anaachaara (immorality), and who roam about caught can be rendered pure. Only those who have pure in the coils of Ahamkaara (ego) have to be punished. Those consciousness can recognise the Divine Nature of the Lord’s who have allowed Rajo Guna and Thamo Guna to Janma (birth) and Karma, said Krishna. All cannot so predominate and Sathwa Guna to be extinguished in them recognise them as Divine. Yet, no one should avoid contact and who have thus lost all trace of Daya (compassion), with the Lord come in human form. Try your very best and Dharma and Daanam (charity) have to be punished.” utilise every chance. There should not be any lapse on your part. Thirdly Krishna informed Arjuna that the fostering of Dharma is also His work. The word Sadhu has another This is emphasised in the tenth sloka of this Chapter, meaning, important in this context. A Sadhu is he who does where the signs of the Adhikari, the deserving candidate, not deviate from his duty, whatever the temptation and are given. “Arjuna! Not all can understand the Divyathwam whatever the danger. The wicked revel in creating trouble (divinity) of my Janma and Karma. Only those who are free for such men and indulging in acts contrary to the injunctions from attachment, hatred, fear and anger; only those who are of the Sastras. What then is the establishment of Dharma? immersed in the Name and Form of the Lord; who know of It is acting strictly according to the Dharma laid down in the no other support than Me, who are sanctified by the Sastras; spreading among people the glory and the splendour knowledge of the Atma; only these can grasp it. Those who of a life lived in Dharma; stabilising reverence towards the seek Me undeviatingly, possessing Sathya, Dharma and Vedas and the Sastras, towards God, Avathars and Prema (love), will reach Me. This is absolutely true, take it Paramapurushas and the sadhana (spiritual discipline) that from Me. Give up any doubt you may have. leads to liberation and a blessedness beyond this life. It is called Dharma-samsthaapana, Dharma-rakshana or “Men render the inner consciousness impure by Dharmoddhaarana. “Whatever I do, it is all for this high dwelling on the objective world through ignorance. They
Geetha Vahini 79 80 Geetha Vahini take delight in mere sabda (sound), rasa (taste), gandha that affect the body. He is the Aartha. Another is worried (smell), etc. When they seek objective pleasure they are by the struggle for prosperity, power, self, property, posterity, tempted to secure the objects that give the pleasure. Foiled etc. He is the Artha-arthi. A third yearns for the realisation in the attempt, they get restless, hateful and afraid. Fear of the Atma, reads the scriptures and sacred texts, moves robs man of his mental resources. It creates anger that cannot ever in the company of spiritual sadhakas, acts along the be easily pacified. Thus, desire, anger and fear are aroused lines laid down by the sages as Sadachara (good conduct), one after the other and those three have to be removed. and is always motivated by the eagerness to reach the Arjuna, revolve in your mind these facts and then act. Sannidhi (Presence) of the Lord. He is the Jijnasu. The Become reasonable. Have faith in My words.” fourth is the Jnani. He is immersed in the Brahma Thathwam (Brahma Principle). Arjuna heard all this and asked, “Nandakumara! Why can You not make this sacred and high stage available for “The first, the Aartha, worships Me only when he is in all persons? You have announced Yourself as difficulty and suffers from grief or pain. When he prays to Premaswaroopa (Embodiment of Love) and Dayamaya Me, I hear it and I satisfy him only in relation to that particular (Embodiment of Compassion). Why then all this partiality? difficulty, that particular grief or pain. So too, when the I must declare it as favouritism, for you endow this stage Artha-arthi prays for riches or position or power or high only on Jnanis and deny it to the Ajnanis. I would even say status, I listen and award him only the particular thing he that the Ajnani, the ignorant person who has no craves for. The Jijnasu is blessed with chances to do discrimination, the person who swings like the pendulum of Nishkama Karma (desireless karma), with a proper Guru as the clock from one thing to another, merits your Grace more. guide, with an intellect that is sharp enough to discriminate The Jnani knows everything. He is aware that the Jagath between Atma and Anatma, and thus helped to achieve the (transitory world) is Vishnumayam (Divine power to Goal. I bless him so that he is saved from distractions and delude). Why then should it be made further clear to him? helped to concentrate on the single aim of Liberation. They have no more need of Grace.” “I am like the Kalpa Vriksha (Tree of Heaven, wish- Krishna replied, “Yes. Men are usually overwhelmed fulfilling tree). My task is to give each what he asks for. I by such doubts. You represent humanity and so your doubt have no prejudice and no favouritism. Not even the shadow is humanity’s doubt. By clearing your doubt, I can also of cruelty can touch Me. No fault can be imputed to Me. announce My Message to Humanity. Listen. Those who The rays of the sun fall equally upon all that are directly in seek Me are of four types. One is always worn out by ills their way. But if something is behind something else, inside
Geetha Vahini 81 82 Geetha Vahini a closed room for instance, how can the Sun illumine? Universal Absolute. Theirs is the correct path. Cultivate the higher yearnings and you receive the higher Karmopasana (Work with an eye on the fruits) is the stages. The fault lies in the aspirant and his aspirations, not incorrect path. My task is to make clear to all the value of in the attitude of the Lord. Dharma Karmas which have to be adopted after due discrimination. “Arjuna! man gives up revering and seeking Me, who is his very Self. How foolish of him! He is not anxious to “But Arjuna, there is one method of reviving Dharma, reach Me. On the other hand, he pursues lesser attainments the task for which I have come. That is Chaathur-varnyam, that are temporary, untrue, transitory. I shall tell you the the organisation of the Four Varnas (caste) based on the reason for this strange and stupid behaviour. Karmopasana Karma (work, dedicated activity) and the Guna (attributes) (Work with an eye on the fruits) gives quick results. Man of the People. The Varna system is essential for the seeks only what is available here and now, in a concrete functioning of the world. Its significance is not easy to grasp. form, capable of being grasped by his senses. Man, Some mislead themselves into the belief that it causes unrest generally, finds Reality too difficult to attain. So he is carried and divides men from one another. If the problem is reasoned away by the attraction of flimsy pleasures, away from the out, then, the real truth will become clear. To conclude that full joy derivable from transcending the senses. the Varna system is not beneficial shows only ignorance. Such a judgement creates confusion. I have established this “The achievement of Jnana is the inner victory; it is organisation in order to promote the welfare of the world, won after long and arduous struggle. Men do not generally i.e., Loka Kshema. The Varnas help man to engage himself have the needed patience. Moreover, they attach greater in acts that he finds congenial and to fulfil himself. Without importance to the gross body, the Sthula Sarira itself. The it, man cannot earn happiness for a moment. body can be happy only with objects that cater to the senses. So men do not seek Jnana, which will send them to paths “For successful activity, Varna is the very breath. Those where the senses are unwanted. They yearn for Karma Siddhi endowed with the Sathwa Guna, who have understood the (Fulfilment of worldly ambitions), not Jnana Siddhi. Those Brahma Thathwam, who foster spiritual, moral and who are caught by urges of the intellect are fewer than those progressive living, who help others to earn the Bliss of who are caught by the senses and their urges. The sensual visualising the Reality of their Nature, are the Brahmins. minded are drawn by the obvious, the patent, the perceptible Those who stand by and guard the sound political system, and the physical. The few who are spiritually minded yearn law and justice, as well as the welfare and prosperity of the for the imperceptible, invisible Bliss of merging with the country, and the moral order laid down for the people; and
Geetha Vahini 83 84 Geetha Vahini who keep under control the wicked and the immoral, and without such impartial investigation, their opinion cannot be come to the rescue of the weak and the distressed—these valued. are the Kshatriyas. “Of course, it is a fact that the system has veered from “Those who store and supply, within proper limits, to the proper path and taken to moving in wrong directions. the people at large the wherewithal for happy physical living This has been noted by many great men. But that cannot be are Vaisyas. Those who lay the foundation for human welfare sufficient reason to throw it overboard. For the reason that by service activities, and provide the strength and sinews the leg is doing the work of the hand, and that the head is are Sudras. I have laid down these Four Varnas in this performing the function of the feet, it is not advisable to cut manner. If these Varnas carry out their assigned duties, off hands and feet. Attempts have to be made to set things humanity will attain all-round progress. As a result of this right, rather than destroying the very system itself. system, a division of service is brought about. The individual leads a happy, harmonious social life, without any grief or “The Varna system is not the cause of all this confusion fear. This Varna system is an example of the Grace that the and unrest. The fault lies more in the haphazard manner in Lord has bestowed on Bharath. which it has developed. It became a plaything in the hands of all types of people. So it lost its original symmetry and “The people of Bharath are indeed blessed, since they harmony. This system is essential, not merely for Bharath, look upon every act as but the execution of His Order and but even for the world. In countries outside India this system as leading to His Grace. This point has to be reflected upon. is not absent. The name may be different, the working is the It is an important issue. The Divine Command is now in same. There also there are four classes—the Sikshaka Varga great danger of being set at nought. If the rulers change the (Teachers), the Rakshaka Varga (Kings), the Vanig Varga face of this Varna system, the world will not have the welfare (Businessmen) and the Sramika Varga (Servants). But in they strive for. Many people argue and teach that Bharath Bharath, the Vargas are decided by birth. In other parts of came to this sorry condition only because of this Varna the world, they are decided by karma, the work each is system. But these folk have to sit quiet for some little time engaged in. That is the distinction. and ponder over the question: ‘Has the country survived as a result of this system? Or, has it come to this sorry condition “Now, among the Brahmins who have been honoured because the system has weakened?’ Then on the basis of by being established in the very first cadre, many can be their conclusion, they can advise the discarding of the found who have left off the path and strayed into mean Varnas. When people find fault with the Varna organisation, ways. So too, in the fourth Varna, the Sudras, many can be
Geetha Vahini 85 86 Geetha Vahini found who are moved by holy ideals, high spiritual aspirations, and who are striving to attain purity of mind as a means of realisation. Just because these things are possible, it is not proper to conclude that the Varna organisation of human society is useless.”
Geetha Vahini 88 Geetha Vahini of its identity? The co-ordination between its nature and its form. If it has the form but not the nature, then it is unreal, false. So too, if each class has no special limits, how can it be identified as a class? It will be neither this, nor that, an amorphous mass, a confused group. This is a Divinely decided organisation; so it was fostered and continued by the great sages, saints and elders, for many generations. But in this iron age of Kali, the brainiest dismiss it as useless junk. CHAPTER IX Without deep inquiry, without discrimination, if people look at this organisation from the external, the individual T standpoint, how can they arrive at right conclusions? Its hough purity of mind is the primary thing for sanctity and value will be revealed if you have the ‘inner the protection of society and the individual in sight’ and the ‘universal’ outlook and the ‘inquiring spirit.’ the realm of the Divine, Varna organisation too Just as the butter latent in milk is made patent by the process is very important. It can never be blown off by ridicule, of churning, so too the specific value of the Four Varnas criticism or condemnation. For, welfare is essential for all; will become manifest only through the process of so rulers and scholars must give up feelings of anger and discriminating enquiry. Then prejudices will perish, reality hatred and calmly delve into the pros and cons and bring will be revealed. the organisation into some good order. That is the thing to do. It is not proper that wise men and intelligent scholars The four Varnas are like the limbs of the same body. should support the meaningless criticisms of the envious They have evolved out of the same Divine Body—the and the ignorant. Those who deny caste are themselves Brahmins from the face, the Kshatriyas from the hands, the forming a caste. Those who deny religion are themselves Vaisyas from the thighs and the Sudras from the feet. Of forming a new religion. Even those who know much become course, these expressions have a deeper inner meaning. prejudiced against Varna and talk as if they are as ignorant Those who teach like the Guru the principles of Jnana are as the rest. That is the wonder! the Voice. They are the Brahmins. The strong armed bear Every object has certain limits. If it exceeds the limits the burden of the Earth, they are the Kshatriyas. The social or breaks through them, it gets destroyed. What is the test edifice is upheld, as on pillars, by the Vaisyas and so they
Geetha Vahini 89 90 Geetha Vahini are figuratively described as emanating from the thighs of goes, they will be saving the country. That is a deluded the Divine Person. Like the feet that are engaged in going belief. If only virtues and faults are analysed carefully and about on all kinds of activities, the Sudras are ever engaged without prejudice, there will be an end of this uninformed in the basic tasks of society. The peace and happiness of campaign of hatred and enmity. Then there will be a great society will suffer even if a single Varna is slack in its task. change in the attitude of people towards the Varna system. And all Varnas are worthwhile and valuable, as all limbs are If hatred increases, it will not benefit anyone. To pursue important. There is no higher or lower. Hatred and rivalry in the ideal of “all are equal” is like running after the mirage to society are as harmful as the stoppage of work by all the slake one’s thirst. It will only breed discontent. The rulers limbs in anger against the stomach! must now assemble and consult the representatives of the A sugar doll is sweet all over. Break off its head and people, namely, the pundits and experienced elders and eat it, it is sweet. Break off a leg and eat it, it is as sweet as discuss the value of this ancient system of social the head. Then how can the Varnas which are the limbs of organisation. Instead, if they just decide on the basis of the selfsame Divinity be pronounced higher or lower? Limbs external forms and features that there is some poison in this are different, but the very same red blood flows in all and and run into panic, that will only reveal their ignorance. The animates all. There is no special variety for the hand or leg rulers as well as the pundits both have the happiness of the or face. The system of Varnas is ordained by the Vedas and people at heart. Why this Varna system originated and with so, there can be no injustice in it. It is not an artifice invented what end in view, had led to comments because it was not by man. So those who try to create differences and hatred, practised on the continued counsels of the wise. by their inconsiderate remarks about it, are only exhibiting Take one small example: some nations have their ignorance. manufactured bombs that can wipe out lakhs (hundred It looks as if those people who argue that, “the abolition thousand) of people at one burst. Though they know this is of the Varna system will bring about human welfare,” are bad, the rulers are themselves encouraging it. If they are the only ones anxious to promote human welfare! They used as the whim takes them, ruin will fall on all. When believe that those who consider the system to be beneficial chaos threatens, they are to be used only for self-defence. are really eager to promote the downfall of the human society! The purpose is not the destruction of the world but the Of course, both are delusions. But this much is true: Those protection of the values of one’s own country and culture. who support the Varnas are really more interested in the So also, the Varna system is to be treated as strong armament promotion of human welfare. The others think that if Varna to protect the country and culture. The rules and regulations,
Geetha Vahini 91 92 Geetha Vahini the restrictions and recommendations are all to defend the the planners and do not carry much meaning to others. The people from ruin. They are disciplines which have to be castles start falling down even while construction is honoured in the way they are laid down and followed strictly proceeding in another place! and correctly. To deal with them as the whim dictates, without As the body is for the Jivi, the world is for the Lord. regard to the directing bunds, the limits and the boundaries, Whatever happens in any part of the body affects the Jivi. is to invite anarchy. So too, all that affects any part of the world moves the Therefore, the elders, the rulers, the great pundits and Lord. He becomes cognisant of it and He reacts to it. Just as you are interested in all the limbs of the body being in the leaders of the community guarded and fostered this perfect trim, the Lord too is interested in seeing that every Organisation and preserved it. Think of this for a while and country and every part of the World is happy and contented. the truth will flash on you—whether it is beneficial or not. If Can He, will He, harm any country which is primarily a part it was ruinous to society, would they have fostered it? Do of Himself? In matters relating to the Lord, all have equal you mean to say they were all foolish, or that they did not rights; all are equal. have the present type of scholarship or were they brainless? Yet, one limb cannot carry out the duties of another. No, no, their intelligence, scholarship, spiritual Each must do the task allotted to it. So too, each Varna eminence, their spirit of inquiry and their impartial, must carry out its allotted share of the activities of society unprejudiced approach to social problems can be found and contribute its best to the welfare of the country. As the only among one in a hundred today. Ascetics who dedicated body has stages, society has the Varnas. If all start trading, all their intellectual and moral strength for the welfare of the who will be the buyers? If all are engaged in fighting, who is world, which task was the very breath of their life; yogis, to provide the wherewithal for their upkeep and maintenance: spiritual warriors and Maharshis who sought to confer true the food, the armour and the equipment? So, each has to contentment to the human community—these were the do his share of social activity and ensure peace, harmony framers of the social organisation which the ‘moderns’ and happiness. That is the wise course, the best organisation condemn. They were not like the reformers today who yearn of society. for welfare in a profusion of words, but who undermine the very thing they profess to yearn for by their actions! This Now, instead of attending to essential tasks, people type of trick was unknown to the ancient sages. Modern are engaged in internecine struggle fearing that the Varnas ideas and plans are hollow and insincere. The present plans are great obstacles to progress. How can people who are are all castles in the air. They cater more to the conceit of unable to keep their body under control keep the country
Geetha Vahini 93 94 Geetha Vahini within limits? Consider that the fostering of the Varna system, Really, from the Adhyathmic (spiritual) point of view, which has been fostered so long by the ancients, is the these Varnas can be characterised also in another way. Those most beneficial thing that has to be done. who are established in the contemplation of Brahman are Brahmins. Those who oppose untruth are Kshatriyas. Those The Lord has not shown any partiality while organising who systematically discriminate the true from the false are the the Varnas. He has no such trait in Him. Some persons ask, Vaisyas. Those who are ever active and follow truth in everyday why should the Lord have such differences? No, He has no life are the Sudras. The happiness of Humanity can be amply sense of inferior or superior. He is sweet all over, as a lump realised only when Varnas function in this way. of sugar. All differences and distinctions are the property of Jivis (the individuals), who do not know the Atmic reality; Now, we shall revert to the subject: Krishna addressed they are the illusions of the Jivis who falsely identify Arjuna, “The four Varnas have been created by Me on the themselves with the non-Atma. basis of Guna and karma. Though I am the doer so far as Consider this example: A mother has four children. they are concerned, I am still a non-doer! Pay attention to But she does not pay the other three as much attention and the fundamental principle and then you will realise that karma, care as she gives to the child in the cradle. Even if the child which is basically jada or consciousnessless and material, does not call out for it, she is ever vigilant to give it food. cannot affect the Atma, which is chaithanya or suffused The other three have to come and worry her for food and with consciousness. The Atma is inherently devoid of things to play with. Observing this, you cannot pronounce attachment. It has no awareness of agency or of its own her a bad mother or a partial mother. The mother adjusts needs or nature or of its possessions. It has no ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ her activities to the capacity and ability of the child. So too, for these are the marks of Ajnana. Only those afflicted with though the entire world is His, though all are His children, Ajnana will suffer from the ego or sense of ‘mine.’ Though He has fixed upon each a part of the responsibility of the it may appear to ordinary eyes that I am the ‘doer,’ I am a work of society, according to the capacity and ability. To non-doer! ascribe faults to such selfless, sincere, simple, ever-blissful Providence is like attributing darkness to the Sun! Darkness “Not only this, karma does not cease to affect the doer and the rays of the Sun cannot exist together. How then can as soon as it is finished. In fact, it is never finished. Karma the Sun be the home of darkness? People who carp so at yields fruits; fruits of karma breed desire for them that results the Sun do not know the Sun at all. It is sheer folly, complete in impulses for further karma. The impulses bring about further ignorance. births. Thus, karma leads to the cycle of birth and deaths. It
Geetha Vahini 95 96 Geetha Vahini is a vicious whirlpool, making you revolve round and round Jnana are Vikarmas! Whatever the karma, if it is done in the and finally dragging you down into the depths. darkness and confusion of Ajnana, however hard you may have exercised your abilities during the activity, its results “Arjuna, listen well to another point also. Karma as can only be worry, grief and travail. It can never result in such, has no capacity to bind. It is the conceit ‘I am the equanimity, balance or calm. Man has to win karma in akarma doer’ that brings about the attachment and the bond. It is and akarma through karma—that is the hallmark of the wise. the desire to earn the fruit that produces the bondage. For example, the zero gets value only with the association of a “Akarma means action-lessness according to some. digit. Karma is zero. Agency or the feeling of ‘doer,’ is But to explain it in simpler language, understand that the associated with the karma; then it breeds bonds. So, Arjuna, activities of the limbs, the senses, intelligence, the feelings, give up the sense of ‘I’ and the karma that you do will never the emotions and mind are all karmas. Now, akarma means, harm you. Karma done without any desire for the fruits among other things, non-activity too. That is to say, it is the thereof will not produce impulses. That is to say, there will attribute of the Atma. So akarma means Atma Sthithi, the be no impulse for birth even. The aspirants of past ages characteristic of the Atma. When you travel in a bus or train performed karma with this high ideal in view. They never or boat, the illusion is created that the trees and hills on felt that they were the ‘doers’ or ‘enjoyers of the fruits’ of either side travel along, and the person feels that he is any act. The Lord did, the Lord gave the fruit, the Lord stationary! The movement of the chariot imposes on hill enjoyed the fruit—that was their conviction. This world has and tree the quality of movement. So too, the person only a relative value, it has no absolute existence. That was unaware of the principles enunciated in the Sastras deludes their faith. Arjuna! You too should cultivate that faith and himself into the belief that the Atma is doing all the activities earn that conviction. Do so, then your mind will become of the senses and the body. Which then is the genuine clarified and pure. akarma—activity-less-ness? The experience of the Atma is “Know also the distinction between karma, Vikarma the perfect activity-less-ness; that is your real nature. It will (karma done with intent) and akarma (desireless action, action not do if you simply desist from external acts. You should done with the attitude of a witness). I shall tell you the main realise the Atmic fundamental, not merely renounce karma; points of difference now, listen. Many aspirants get confused for it is impossible to be completely activityless.” about this. Not all can grasp the distinction. They take it that Swadharma (one’s own dharma) is karma and that all karma done, not as Dharma, but with a view to earn Atma
Geetha Vahini 98 Geetha Vahini impulses and desires, is bound by karma. But those free from these cannot be affected by the temptations of sound, touch, form, taste, smell and other attractions of the senses. Such is the true Sanyasin. He is unmoved. The Jnani is supremely happy by himself, without the need to be dependent on other things. He finds karma in akarma and akarma in karma. He may be engaged in karma but he is not affected in the least. He has no eye on the fruit of actions. “You may ask how he is able to do that. Listen: He is CHAPTER X ever content. The contented man is free, he does not depend upon others. He is unaffected by the feeling of agency. He “ is content with whatever happens to him, well or ill. For he Dhananjaya! Only he is entitled to be called a is convinced that the Lord’s Will must prevail. His mind is Pundit, who has seen clearly the distinction unshaken and steady. He is ever jubilant. Want of between karma and akarma. If he has only stuffed contentment is a sign of the Ajnani. Those who give up the in his head the matter contained in books, he is not a pundit. Purusharthas (goals of human life) and walk the path of The Pundit must have an intellect which grants the vision of sloth, how can they be said to be happy, whatever happens? the Truth—samyag-darsana. When that vision is gained, Contentment is the treasure that is won by the Jnani. It cannot all karma becomes ineffective and harmless. The fire of be won by the Ajnani who piles one wish on another, and Jnana has the power to consume and burn karma. builds one plan after another, who pines perpetually, worries himself and sets his heart ablaze with greed. “Some people say that a Jnani must perforce suffer the consequences of Prarabdha Karma (that which we “The Jnani is not mastered by the dualities of Joy and are presently undergoing); he cannot escape from it. This is Grief, Victory and Defeat, Gain and Loss. He is a conclusion that other persons draw, not the experience of Dwandaatheetha (beyond duality). He scorns hatred and the Jnani himself. To those who watch him, he might appear never allows it to affect him. Both the Swaroopa (form, to be reaping the fruit of past karma. But he is absolutely reality) and the Swabhava (essential quality) of the Atma unaffected. Whoever is dependent on objects for happiness, guarantee that It is unaffected. It is Asanga (not of the world). or pursues sensory pleasures, whoever is motivated by It is uninfluenced by anything that is not Atma. It has neither
Geetha Vahini 99 100 Geetha Vahini birth nor death, hunger nor thirst, grief nor delusion. Hunger under Dravyayajna. Again, when all physical activities, mental and thirst are qualities of the Prana (vital essence, breath). activities and speech are utilised for sadhana (spiritual Birth and death are characteristics of the body. Grief and discipline), then, it becomes Thapoyajna. How can it be delusion are affections of the mind. So, Arjuna, do not assign Thapas (asceticism) if you are laid down due to weakness any status for these. Know yourself as the Atma. Give up arising from missing a meal? Doing karma but yet remaining all delusion and become unattached. Be like the lotus leaf in unbound by karma—that is Yoga Yajna. the marshy lake of Samsara (change); do not get smeared “And Swadhyaya Yajna? It means studying with with the mud around you. That is the sign of Asanga; in it humility and reverence the sacred scriptures that lead you but yet outside it. Be like the lotus leaf, not like the porous to liberation or Moksha. This study is the means to repay ‘blotting paper’ that gets tainted with whatever it comes in the debt due to the Rishis who put the Scriptures together. contact with. The next one is Jnana Yajna. By this is meant not the “Do Abhisheka (ceremonial bath of deity) to the Atma- knowledge of the visible and perceptible but the Jnana of linga, with the pure waters of your own pure Chittha-vritthi, the invisible, the imperceptible, (the Paroksha Jnana, not mental impulses. When the chittha (consciousness, heart) the Aparoksha Jnana). Listen to the Sastras that are related moves in one direction and the indriyas (senses) move to this Jnana, study them and ponder over the teachings in towards another, the person is doubly confused. So, keep your mind, weighing the pros and cons. This is called Jnana attachment afar. When that is done, whatever you do Yajna. Jnana means also the eagerness to realise the Atma becomes a sacrifice, a Yajna. Whatever you speak becomes Thathwa through inquiry from elders and those who have a holy manthra. Wherever you plant your foot, the place is spiritual experience. rendered holy. “Arjuna! You may ask Me about the means whereby “Arjuna! I shall tell you something about Yajna also. this can be acquired. Those anxious to get it have to go to Listen calmly, controlling all agitations of the mind. People realised souls and win their grace; and studying well their talk of Dravyayajna, Thapoyajna, Yogayajna, etc. If a pit moods and manners, they must await the chance to ask for is dug, the earth excavated becomes a mound by its side. their help. When doubts arise, they should approach them There is no pit without a mound. When riches accumulate calmly and courageously. Studying bundles of books and in one place, there must be corresponding charity too. The delivering hours-long discourses and wearing the ochre robes proper utilisation of one’s riches is Dravyayajna. What is do not make the genuine Jnani. Jnana can be won only from proper utilisation? Gift of cows, of lands, of skill are included and through elders who have experienced the Absolute. You
Geetha Vahini 101 102 Geetha Vahini have to serve them and win their love. How can doubts be “As the cow takes her calf near when it sees it, so the ended by the study of books? They only tend to confuse Guru will draw the Sishya (disciple) to his presence and the mind. give him the milk of Grace. The Sishya ought to be of sterling character. Then, just as a clean piece of iron will be attracted “Books can at best inform, they cannot demonstrate by the magnet, he will receive the immediate attention of the by direct proof. Only the realised can convince by direct Teacher. demonstration. So they have to be sought after and served reverentially. Then only can this precious Jnana be won. No “The qualification of the Guru can be inquired into by amount of sea water can slake one’s thirst. No amount of the Sishya; in fact, he ought to. For, he needs a Teacher. Sastric study can solve doubt. Arjuna! I shall describe the characteristics which a Teacher should possess. He must have not merely book-knowledge, “Besides, the aspirant for Jnana must have not only but the wisdom derived through direct experience. He must Bhakthi (devotion) and Sraddha (steady faith) but he should be established in the Reality, that is, in Brahmanishta (steady also be simple and pure. He should not grow impatient and contemplation of Brahma). Mere Sastra Jnana is incompetent irritate the teacher. Haste ruins chances of success. Whatever to grant Mukthi (Self-realisation). It can at best help in gaining the Guru tells should be practised and experienced. You Bhukthi (a living). Why, there are some who by sheer should not try out every single item of advice that you hear Anubhava Jnana (knowledge gained through your own or learn, thus changing the sadhana as fancy takes hold, experience) have won Mukthi, without a grain of Sastra Jnana. even from the desire to become a Jnani quick. Doing thus, But such persons cannot save disciples who are pestered you will only end as a complete Ajnani. Why, it is sometimes by doubt. They cannot understand their difficulties and preferable to remain an Ajnani; for such people tend to end sympathise with them. up in madness. Therefore, one has to be very careful. “There are lakhs (100,000) and lakhs of persons who “You must endeavour to please the Guru and win his are Gurus in name only. All those in gerua (ochre) are now favour by obeying his orders and serving him lovingly. You ‘Gurus.’ Even those who smoke ganja (drug like marijuana) should have no other thought than his welfare and happiness. are ‘Gurus.’ All those who indulge in discourses are ‘Gurus,’ Give up all else and win his Grace. Then, Jnana is yours. all who write books are ‘Gurus’! Wandering over the country Instead, if you are disobedient and critical through egoism and learning to argue, no one can claim the name. He should and want of faith, you cannot be blessed by the vision of possess the power through direct experience to uplift the the Truth. You will be plunged in gloom. disciple and put him on the track of sadhana prescribed by
Geetha Vahini 103 104 Geetha Vahini Sastras. Of what use is argumentative skill? Whatever is judge the aspirant’s heart, his real nature. The Guru must said and done by him must have the sanction of the Sastras. act as the alarm clock to the disciples who are caught in the Spouting of things imbibed from books in long speeches sleep of Ajnana. If the Guru is a miser and the disciple is a which move the listeners from one wave of excitement to sloth, woe be to both.” another does not make a Guru. They may be heroes in Thus Krishna taught Arjuna very clearly the lecturing, but they are zeros in sadhana and in the mastery qualifications of both the Guru and the Sishya, their conduct, of the spiritual field. They can be schoolmasters, but they scholarship, virtues and weaknesses, activities and cannot confer Bhakthi or point out the way of Liberation. characteristics. These valuable gems of advice were These ‘Gurus’ attain only that stage and the Sishyas who addressed not only to Arjuna, but to the whole world. All resort to them get just that. They have as much value as the who seek to become either Gurus or Sishyas must pay books which contain all the matter that they pour forth. attention to these precious words. Many unwary Sadhakas are attracted by the magic of words and the verbal gymnastics of such showy ‘Gurus.’ They The natures of the Gurus and Sishyas of today are in may be called Pundits. They may give lectures. But just keeping with the low standards of today. In ancient times a because of this, they do not become entitled to grant the Guru could be found only with great difficulty. Thousands boon of Jnana. That can be done only by Avathars (the of eager seekers searched in the forests for them, for they Lord come in human form), Devamsa-sambhuthas (Divine were so rare and so precious. Now, Gurus are available at Beings), and Thatwavids (Masters of Wisdom) who have every street corner by the dozens, but true Sishyas are realised the Absolute. and Jnanis who have attained the declining in number. Both are deteriorating fast, and each is summum bonum of spiritual sadhana and tasted the Supreme becoming as the other, suited to the other’s level. The Gurus Bliss. It is no use claiming a fraction of this or that experience. have been reduced to the necessity of feeding and fostering The experience must be of the Full and itself full. Those Sishyas; not that it is wrong, when the Sishyas are worthy. who know only a fraction will take you up to a certain point But the Gurus are afraid of the Sishyas deserting them and and leave you there, in the middle region, like Thrisanku, so they have to cater to their tastes and fancies. The Sishyas who was hung between heaven and earth. claim to be Guru-puthras (Sons of Gurus), to be Ashramavasis (residents of hermitage), Sadhakas “The Guru must study the virtues and qualities of the (aspirants), etc., but their lives are untouched by the Ashram aspirant who seeks his guidance. He must not be moved or atmosphere, sadhana or Sadhu qualities. They have not even prejudiced by his wealth, or position. He must be able to elementary gratitude to the Guru. They mouth slogans like
Geetha Vahini 105 106 Geetha Vahini Krishnarpanam, but their acts reveal only Deha-arpanam! (dedication to the Body, not to God). Besides, the Sishyas lay down conditions! Their desire for recreation, easy living and comfort has to be honoured by the Guru. The Guru must ensure the happiness of the Sishya without insisting on any sadhana, or causing any loss or worry. Moksha must fall like a fruit right into their lap. The Guru should not recommend any rigorous discipline or rule of life. The Guru must respect all the wishes of the Sishya. If he goes against him, the Guru is immediately given up and condemned.
Geetha Vahini 108 Geetha Vahini and conquer the outward fleeing mind. The Gurus of today shout every day from platforms what they stuffed into their heads the previous day under the midnight lamp. Their performance is only like regurgitating the food once swallowed, and nothing more. They talk like parrots reproducing what they have learnt by rote. Even children know that greed and anger have to be mastered. But in these people, greed and anger, envy and hatred, lust and pride pop up their devilish heads through every little word that CHAPTER XI they utter, every little deed they do. If those who claim to be Gurus do not themselves master these propensities, how can the unfortunate disciples who resort to them succeed? H ow can such coddled comfort-loving persons If the Guru is supremely self-sacrificing, saturated with attain Moksha (liberation)? If a Guru is not selfless Sarvajana-samaana (sympathy based on equal able to secure such disciples, why should he treatment to all), seeking to sustain Sathya, his soul suffused deplore his fate? It is strange that there are Gurus who with strength-giving thoughts, striving to secure sorrowless lament when they are not able to attract such disciples lives for all, leading a sweet and simple life, satisfied only towards them! Opium eaters, ganja smokers, are unfit to by the chance to show others San-maarga (Noble Path) be Gurus. They are cheats. How can those who spend all and Sath Guna (Noble Qualities)—then, perhaps only a their energies in securing the wherewithal for their living few disciples will gather around him. They will impose upon be Gurus? How can those who seek to fulfil their sensual him faults that sully him and cast doubt upon his integrity fancies be Disciples? These are Dhana (Money) gurus, and genuineness! But the Guru will be as serene as ever, for those are Mada (Pride) disciples! To consider such as he suffers no loss. The loss is all for the Sishyas, who let Gurus and Sishyas is to drag those holy names into the go the great chance. dust of disgrace. Of one thing, be certain. So long as the delusion that Who, then, is the genuine Guru? It is he who teaches one is the body is not cast aside, God cannot be realised; the path of destroying Moha or Delusion. And who is the however far one may wander, whatever the number of Gurus genuine Sishya or Disciple? It is he who seeks to control one might select and serve. Stick to that delusion and all the
Geetha Vahini 109 110 Geetha Vahini Dhyana (meditation), all the Japam (repetition of name of highest of the Purushas). Arjuna is Narothama (Best among God), all the waters of all the Holy Theerthams (Sacred men). That is the reason why they are the ideal Guru-Sishya. Waters, pilgrim centres) that you bathe in, cannot win success Others are Guru-Sishya only in name. Self-willed Sishyas for you! All your effort is as useless as trying to bale out and power-drunk Gurus are simply wasting their lives in water with a vessel riddled with leaks. vain pursuits. Krishna is an ocean of Prema (Love). He watched over Arjuna as one watches over the eye or the Householders who carry out their duties are any day heart. He taught holiness and transformed into holiness. He preferable to such Sadhus. They follow their Ashrama loved and was loved beyond compare. That makes the guru Dharma and they tread the correct path in unceasing a genuine guru. And Arjuna? He too is no ordinary being. remembrance of the Lord and so these householders realise His Thyaga (detachment, surrender) is unapproachable. the Goal. If the nature of the Gurus and Sishyas of today is Whatever the crisis, he stuck to Krishna’s command and to be considered, volumes can be written. But that will be Krishna’s word. He wore the comradeship with the Lord as using precious time for unessential discussion. So we shall the armour that will save him from all harm, as the very revert to our main topic. body in which he dwelt as something which he must foster, For, even to dwell on the sacred Guru-Sishya bond of strengthen and guard. Though a mighty force, he was ready Krishna-Arjuna in the same breath with the relationship of to efface it when necessary. This is how Guru and Sishya the present day “Gurus” and “Sishyas” will be a sacrilege. should be bound together. They are unique, incomparable, the supreme pair, unapproachable by any other. They have to be taken as the The Lord who is the embodiment of Prema realised ideal by all aspirants and teachers. Arjuna bowed in humility the sincerity of the Disciple and estimated his attainments and carried out sincerely the precepts of the Guru. Krishna and then detailed to him the benefits and glory of Atma fostered what was really beneficial to Arjuna. He paid full Jnana. “Kauntheya” (Son of Kunthi [Arjuna’s mother]), He consideration to what will really promote the reputation, the said, “By means of Jnana, you can see in yourself and in Atmananda (Bliss of realisation of the Self) and the Dharma Me, all things. Then, duality and the consequent delusion of Arjuna. He tended him and fended him, as the very breath will disappear, as darkness disperses before the rising sun. of His Life. That was the type of Guru the Lord was for “Arjuna, I know well your past and the background of him. your birth. Yours is no ordinary birth. You are born with Krishna is Paramatma (Creator). Arjuna is Jivatma Divine (Daivi) accomplishments and heritage. I alone am (embodied being). Krishna is Purushothama (Lord of All, aware of it, no one else. Since you are unaware of it you are
Geetha Vahini 111 112 Geetha Vahini now condemning yourself as a sinner who kills kith and kin, “Sraddha is only the first step. You must have been teachers and elders! yearning to imbibe the teachings I am imparting. This is very necessary. Along with these, you must also be vigilant; “Even if you have sinned, are not sinners saved? do not yield to sloth. Again, you may fall into company that Repentance is enough to transmute sin into sanctity. The is not congenial or encouraging. To escape the evil influence Lord graciously accepts contrition and pours His Blessings. of such company and to strengthen your mind to avoid it The Rathnakara who was engaged in acts of sin until the altogether, mastery over the senses is required. moment when wisdom dawned, became a saint through “Do not admit doubt into you. Want of faith or repentance. He became the sage, Valmiki is it not? His story steadiness is not as destructive as the venom of doubt. In is proof of the value of contrition. You may ask, is it enough its operation and consequence, it is like the tubercular bacilli. if one is free from the effects of sin? Should not the effects It is born in Ajnana and it penetrates into the cavity of the of Punya (good deeds) be also given up? Why, one has heart of man and breeds there. It is the parent of disaster. the freedom to give up merits of Punya, though one may not have equal freedom to give up the demerit of Paapa “Therefore, destroy this demon with the sword of Self- (sin). The roaring forest fire reduces to ashes everything in knowledge or Atma Jnana. Arise, Arjuna! Engage in activity its way. So too, the mighty conflagration of Jnana will as if duty bound, have full faith in My Words, do as I bid consume and destroy all sin and all Punya. with no thought of the fruit therefrom. Be a practitioner of Nishkama Karma. By that renunciation, you will get “To acquire this sacred spiritual Jnana, one thing is established in Jnana; you will win Liberation from change, essential: Sraddha, steady faith in the Sastras and the from birth and death. Teachers, and in the acquisition of Jnana. Without earnestness born of faith, no task however tiny can be “Give up the idea that you are the doer and that you accomplished by man. Therefore, you can yourselves see are the beneficiary. You can do this by dedicating both deed how essential it is for earning Jnana. Sraddha is the and fruit to the Lord. Then, no sin can affect you, for you incomparable treasure chest of Sama (control of senses), are not the doer and the deed must perforce be holy. Like Dama (self-control, patience), Uparathi (mind control by oil on the tongue, collyrium on the eye, lotus leaf on water, withdrawing senses from sensory objects), Thithiksha the deed is with you, but not of you. Whatever you do or (vigilance, fortitude) and Samadhana (mind control by hear or see, you remain unaffected, devoid of deeds, poise), each one a coveted possession. innocent of listening or seeing. The joy derived from the
Geetha Vahini 113 114 Geetha Vahini external world opens the gateways of grief; it is fleeting. But “Dhyana Yoga is possible only on the basis of this you are eternal, the very source of Bliss, above and beyond Nishkama Karma (action). If the mind is not under control and amenable to one’s orders, it can become one’s greatest all this, the Atma Swaroopa (Inner consciousness, God) itself. foe. So live in solitude so that you can master the senses. A That is your genuine nature. You are unrelated to these horse without reins, a bull unused to the yoke and a Sadhaka activities that are called deeds and these consequences which whose senses are not mastered are all like a river without you now mistake as real. You are not the doer, you are just water. Such sadhana is a waste. the Witness, the Seer! All your perplexity has arisen from the delusion that you are the doer, from your ego and the “So arise, Arjuna! Practise Dhyana Yoga (meditation). sense of ‘mine.’ Know the Brahman. Take up the tasks but Resolve to master the senses through this Yoga and follow it steadily, systematically, regularly, at a stated time and in a renounce the consequences. Giving up the fruit of activity stated place, without changing them as the whim takes you. is far superior to the giving up of activity itself. Karma Yoga A regular system is essential for this Yoga. Observe it strictly. is far superior to Karma Sanyasa. Do not alter as fancy dictates, that will bring about dire consequences. For those who eat too much and get “Well, superior to both of those is Dhyana Yoga. I exhausted with the task of assimilating it, for those who eat shall tell you why. Dhyana Yoga needs the support of Karma less and suffer from exhaustion, for those who sleep too Yoga and so, Karma Yoga was first taught to you. Those much or too little, for those who indulge in Dhyana who renounce the fruits while actively engaged in Karma according to ‘convenience’ (that is to say, those who do it are very dear to Me, they are the true Sanyasins, the real for long hours one day because they have no other work, Renouncers. I have no affection for those who give up the and do just token Dhyana the next day, because they have Ritual Fire and desist from all activity except eating, sleeping lots of work), for those who give free rein to the six inner and craving for sensory pleasures and behave like enemies (Kama [desire, lust, greed] Krodha [anger] and the Kumbhakarna’s kinsmen; idling and wasting their time. I am rest), for those who do not confer joy on parents, and specially the mother—more than all these, for those who unapproachably far from idlers. He who has not renounced entertain doubt and have little faith in the Lord, or in the the pursuit of wishes can never become a Yogi however Guru, whom they have chosen and installed in their hearts— busy he may be in sadhana. Only he who is careful not to Dhyana will yield no fruit at all. get entangled in the senses and who is unattached to the consequences of his deeds can become a Sarva-sanga- “The mind of the Yoga adept should be like the steady parithyaagi (renouncer of all attachments). upright unshaken flame of the lamp, kept in the windless
Geetha Vahini 115 116 Geetha Vahini windowsill. Whenever the slightest sign of unsteadiness One seems as hard as the other; the twin tasks of controlling occurs, you should endeavour to curb the mind and not the mind and practising the Yoga. Krishna, you are advising allow it to wander. Develop the consciousness that you are an impossible task, beyond the capacity of anyone.” in all and the feeling of oneness that all is in you. Then you The Lord broke into a smile on hearing these words. can take up and succeed in all the Yogas. Then you are free “Arjuna! You have described the mind and known its nature from all distinctions such as ‘I’ and ‘others,’ or as ‘Atma very well. But it is not an impossible task. The mind, can be and Paramatma.’ The joy and grief of others will then mastered, however difficult the task might be. By systematic become equally yours. You can then never harm others. practice (Abhyasa) and by relentless Inquiry (Vichara) and Then all can be loved and adored in the awareness that they Detachment (Vairagya)—the mind can be mastered. There are Sarveswara (the Lord).” Lord Krishna declared that those is no task that cannot be accomplished by steady practice. who have attained this vision are really the supreme Yogis. Place faith in the Lord and practise with the certainty that you have the power and the Grace—and all tasks become Meanwhile, Arjuna is beset by doubt and he asks for easy. some elucidation and explanation so that he may get convinced. “Krishna! All that you have been telling me is “Therefore, whoever enters upon this sadhana (spiritual very pleasant to the ear and I can well imagine that it must practice) with determination will attain the supreme Goal, be a source of Ananda to those who attain success. But it is available only for souls transmuted through several births. so difficult, beyond the reach of all. The Yoga wherein Remember, the person who has achieved Yoga is superior everything has to be realised as equal (Samathwam to the person who is the master of ritual Karma. So strive, [equanimity]) is fraught with obstacles even for the fully O Arjuna, to become a Yogi, to attain that high and holy equipped Sadhaka. What then am I to say to people like me status. But this is not all you have to do. There is a status, who are common aspirants? Is it ever possible for us? higher than even this. Whoever fixes his entire consciousness Krishna! Is the mind so easily controllable? Alas, even an in Me, whoever earnestly meditates on Me, to the exclusion elephant cannot drag as the mind does. It is the nursery of of everything else, he is superior to all, he is a Mahayogi. waywardness. Its mulishness and obstinacy are also very powerful. It is a terrible shrew. It can never be caught. It will “Dhyana Yoga and Jnana Yoga both are inner never halt at one place. It is like capturing the wind or disciplines. They are based on Sraddha (faith) and Bhakthi bundling up water—the attempt to catch the mind and tame (devotion). Without these two, they are both unattainable; it. How can anyone enter upon Yoga with such a mind? the pursuit itself is vain. A Sadhaka, deprived of them, is as
Geetha Vahini 117 118 Geetha Vahini a wooden doll, lifeless, unaware of the goal. The basic quality) of Parameswara (The supreme Lord) and the Para requisite is deep-rooted Prema towards the Lord. How can Prakruthi to be His Swaroopa. Dwell on the meaning of you get this? By getting to know the glory, the splendour, these, Swabhava and Swaroopa, and grasp it well. The Gross the nature and characteristics of the Lord, His Swabhava is bound by the dictates of Chaithanya, which is Sarva (essential quality) and Swaroopa (reality). That is why I am Swathanthra, complete master, ever free. now instructing you about these. I am imparting to you fully the wisdom of the Sastras, supplemented by the wisdom of “‘Jivi’ means that which assumes Prana (vital breath); inner experience. Know that there is nothing further for you the Jivi holds on to Prana, through his skill and intelligence. to know. Of the thousands of aspirants, there are few who He is the Antharyamin (God spirit in all creation), who has strive to acquire this Jnana (wisdom). And, of these, only penetrated into everything and who sustains everything. So, some one single individual achieves success. All who start the Para Prakruthi is just Paramatma itself. All that becomes do not reach the goal. manifest with the same Chaithanya has to be taken as One. “Arjuna! Note that there is nothing higher than Me in “Jada (inert matter), Chaithanya (consciousness) are the World. All are strung in Me like flowers on a string. The the two essentials for the entire Creation. They are the same Five Elements, Manas (mind), Buddhi (intellect) and as Prakruthi, Purusha. The Chaithanya Shakthi (universal Ahamkaram (ego)—these eight varieties of Prakruthi (nature) power of energy), when it entertains the idea of Bhoga have produced the Sthula-Sukshma Prapancha, the Gross (luxury), expresses the World out of its own Swakarma. and the Subtle in Creation. This is called Apara (lower) The Jada assumes the form of the Deha (body). Both these Prakruthi. There is another Prakruthi distinct from this. That are My Nature. The Easwara, who causes Creation, is known as Para (super, above) Prakruthi. It is neither Sthula Preservation and Dissolution through these, is I Myself, (gross body) nor Sukshma (subtle body); it is Chaithanya remember. There is no substance other than Me; there is no (consciousness), indwelling in the Jivi (individual). The Jagath Reality other than Me. I am the Primal Cause, the Primal (world) itself is its aspiration. Substance. ‘I am One; let Me become Many’; thus I Myself “The Lord first created the gross world and then as resolve upon this expansion into manifoldness, called Srishti Jiva, He entered it and rendered it Chith, by His Chaithanya (creation). That resolution affected and motivated the Maya (consciousness). This is declared clearly in the Vedas. You Shakthi (Power of Divine Delusion) and so the Mahath must consider the Apara Prakruthi (evanescent and Thathwa (Cosmos principle) got produced. That was the transitory aspect of God) to be the Swabhava (essential first step in the evolution of Prakruthi.
Geetha Vahini 119 120 Geetha Vahini “If a seed is planted in the earth and watered, in a day or two it will drink in the moisture and swell in size. The sprouting has not yet taken place but the first change is this. The Mahath Thathwa is a happening of this type. Next, in accordance with the will of the Lord, a sprout arises. That is called Mahadahamkaram (The Primordial Ego). From it, five leaves break forth, the subtle principles of the Five Elements. The entire Jagath (world) is the combined product of these eight: Prakruthi Shakthi, Mahath Thathwa, Ahamkaram and the Five Elements or Panchabhuthas.”
Geetha Vahini 122 Geetha Vahini statement of Krishna. We walk in the thick dusk of evening when things are seen but dimly. A rope lies higgledy-piggledy on the path. Each one who sees it has his own idea of what it is, though it is really just a length of rope. One steps across it, taking it to be a garland. Another takes it to be a mark made by running water and treads on it. A third man imagines it to be a vine, a creeper plucked from off a tree and fallen on the path. Some others are scared that it is a snake; is it not? CHAPTER XII Similarly, the One Para Brahman, without any change or transformation affecting It, being all the time It and It “ The Apara Prakruthi (Transient Nature), about only, manifests as the Prapancha (created world) of manifold which I speak, is just a manifestation of My names and forms, the cause of all this seeming being the Shakthi, My Glory, remember. Seen superficially, dusk of Maya (Delusion). The rope might appear as many with the gross vision, the sthuladrishti, the Universe might things. It might provoke various feelings and reactions on appear as Many. But that is wrong. There is no Many at all. various people. It has become the basis for variety. But it The yearning of the Inner Consciousness, the Anthah never changes into the Many. It is ever One. The rope is Karana, is towards the One; that is the real Drishti (vision, ever the rope. It does not become the garland or the streak point of view). When the inner Vision is saturated with Jnana, of water or the creeper or the snake. Brahman might be the Jagath, or Creation, will be seen as Brahman and as misinterpreted in a variety of ways, but it is ever Brahman nothing else. Therefore the Inner Consciousness must be only. For all the various interpretations, Brahman is the One educated to interest itself only in Jnana.” The Jagath is Real Basis. Like the string for the garland, the foundation saturated with the Jagadisa (Lord of the Universe). Creation for the building, Brahman is the string that penetrates and is nothing but the Creator in that Form. Isavasyam idam holds together the garland of Jivis; it is the foundation for sarvam, it is said. (All this is God). the structure of Prakruthi. Note this. The string and the structure are not visible; only the flowers and the building Though there is only One, it appears as Many. Let us are evident. That does not mean they are non-existent! In remind ourselves of an example with reference to this fact, they support the flowers and the building. Well, you
Geetha Vahini 123 124 Geetha Vahini can know of their existence and their value by a little effort Motive, unseen by those who look only at the surface. It is at reasoning. If you do not take that trouble, they escape the Antharyamin (God spirit in all creation), in other words. your notice. Reason, examine—and you can arrive at the That is why Krishna said, “I am Rasa (taste) in Water; I am string that holds the flowers together and the foundation, Effulgence, Prabha in the Sun and Moon; I am the Pranava hidden in the earth. Do not be misled by the Aadheya (the (Om, the original sound) in the Vedas; I am Sound in the Akasa (space); I am Pourusham (Heroism, Adventure and Contained, the Thing held) into denying the Aadhara, the Aspiration) in Man.” Holder, the Container, the Basis, the Support. If you deny it, you miss the Truth and hold on to a Delusion. Reason Let us consider the topic of Pranava, which has been and discriminate, then believe and experience. mentioned. Krishna said that the Pranava is the very Life of For the Seen, there is an Unseen Basis. To grasp the the Vedas, is it not? The Vedas are reputedly “An-aadi” or Unseen, the best means is Inquiry, and the best proof is “Beginningless.” Pranava is spoken of as the very life-breath Experience. For those who have experienced, no description of the Vedas, which are themselves beyond all beginning. is needed. Take it that the Pranava is the subtle essence, the underlying Form of every particle and substance in the Universe. The nature and qualifications of individual beads are not important at all. They should not distract our attention. There are two parts in every single substance in the Concentrate rather on the inner Reality, the Basis of all the Universe: Name and Form, Nama and Roopa. Take away Beads, the Brahman; that is the Essential Quest. There may these two and there is no Prapancha or Universe any more. be many varieties of flowers in a garland, even trivial ones The Form is conceived and controlled by the Name. The (Thamasik jivis) or flashy ones (Rajasik jivis) or nice pure Roopa is dependent on the Name. So if you reason out ones (Sathwik jivis) but the string, the Basis, the Paramatma which is more lasting, you will find that the Name is Nithyam is independent of all of them. It is unaffected; it is Sathya, (eternal) and the Roopam is Anithyam (evanescent). Nithya (unaffected by time), Nirmala (pure, unaffected by Consider the case of persons who have done various good works, achieved meritorious deeds, constructed hospitals desire). or schools or temples or places of worship. Now, even Flowers cannot become a garland without the string; when their Form is absent from the world for men to see, so too, Brahman unites all Jivis. You cannot separate the their Names with all the associated fame are ever present in two in all things and substances. Brahman fills everything. human memory, is it not? The Roopam (form) lasts but for The Five Elements are but Its manifestations. It is the Inner a brief time. But the Namam (name) continues.
Geetha Vahini 125 126 Geetha Vahini Names are countless and so are Roopams. But there is also naturally drawn towards sound. That is the reason is one matter which you have to take into consideration why it is compared to a serpent. The serpent has two crude here, a matter which is within the daily experience of all, qualities: one, its crooked gait and two, its tendency to bite from the pundit down to the ignoramus: Aksharas or letters. all that comes in its way. These two are also the In Telugu, there are fifty-two letters; in English, there are characteristics of man. He too seeks to hold and possess just twenty-six. Even if you pile up the entire literary output all that he sets his eyes on. He too moves crookedly. in Telugu or in English and the piles rise mountain high it is But there is, in the serpent, one praiseworthy trait. all composed of either the fifty-two Telugu letters or the However poisonous and deadly its nature might be, when twenty-six English ones, not a single letter more. the strains of the charmer’s music are played, it spreads its Similarly, in the human body there are six nerve centres, hood and merges itself in the sweetness of that sound, all in the form of the lotus flower. All the six lotus-forms forgetting everything else. Similarly man too can, by practice, have one letter or sound attached to each petal. Like the merge himself into the Bliss of Pranava. This Sabdopasana reeds in the harmonium, when the petals are moved, each (Worship through sound) is a principal means of realising one emanates a distinct sound. Those who follow this the Paramatma, who is “the Pranava of the Vedas.” He is statement intelligently may get a doubt. If the petals are said not other than Sabda (sound). That is the reason why the to move, who or what is moving them? Yes, the Force that Lord said that He is the “Pourusha of Man.” Pourusha is moves them is the Anaahathadhwani, the Primeval Sound, the vitality, the Prana of Man. Without it, Man has no the Undistinguished Indistinguishable Sound, emanating manliness. However strong may be the force of the drag of without Effort, irrespective of Conscious Will. That is the previous births, it has to yield to the strength of adventure Pranava. As beads in the string, all letters and the sounds and achievement emanating from Pourusha. Unaware of this they represent are strung on the Pranava. That is the meaning potentiality, foolish man is misled into cursing his fate; of the statement that He is the “Pranava of the Vedas.” cursing the “inescapable” effects of what he dreads as Krishna’s teaching is that you should merge your mind in “Prarabdha (present karma)”! the Pranava, which is the Universal Basis. Everyone has to exercise Pourusha; for, without it, life The mind has an innate tendency to merge in whatever itself is impossible. Living is struggling, striving, achieving. it contacts. It craves for this. So, it is ever agitated and God has created man so that he might wield the talent of restless. But by constant practice and training, it can be “Pourusha” and achieve victory. His purpose is not to make directed towards the Pranava and taught to merge with it. It man a consumer of food, a burden upon the earth, an animal
Geetha Vahini 127 128 Geetha Vahini that is a slave to its senses. He does not aim at creating a “Of course, when I say strength, I mean the strength horde of idlers and loungers, who shy at hard work, and of the intellect, Buddhibalam. For the world knows many accumulating fat, grow into monstrous shapes. He does varieties of balams (strength, fortitude): Dhanabalam, born not create man with the idea that he should, while alive, of wealth, Vidyabalam, born of scholarship, Janabalam, ignore his Creator and deny Atma and wander about like coming from the consciousness that one has a large animals, allowing both intelligence and discrimination to go following, Manobalam, arising from one’s determination; to waste, moving about without an iota of gratitude to the Dehabalam, which is just muscular force, etc. All those Giver of all the gifts which he consumes and enjoys! are to be considered as Mine for I am the Parameswara. Only, all forms of strength have to be free from Kama and Prakruthi (nature) too punishes those who exploit it Raga, Desire and Attachment. If Kama and Raga adhere, for self-aggrandisement, saying “This is mine, that too is then it becomes bestial strength, not Divine; it is Pasu-balam, mine, that belongs to those who belong to me.” She punishes not Pasu-pathi-balam. heavily those who break her code. That is the reason why “Kama means, the desire to possess a thing, which is Krishna describes to Arjuna the way of Upasana or Worship so strong that even when there is no chance of securing it, in great detail, for, Upasana is using Prakruthi, to reach the the mind hankers for it. Raga is the feeling that a thing must Lord who transcends it. be in one’s possession, even though it is evident that it cannot be there for long, for it is after all an evanescent “Arjuna! Many people anxious to offer uninterrupted thing. Ranjana is the root of the word, Raga. Ranjana worship to Me go into the thick forest. That is an insane indicates the capacity to give pleasure. Any form of strength, step. There is no need to seek the jungle as if I am only that is polluted by either of these two, cannot claim the there. There is no place where I am not. There is no Form dignity of Divinity. which is not Mine. I am the Five Elements: Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Ether! Where can you find a place devoid of one “Some forms of balam (strength) attain height or depth, or other of these Five? To experience My Presence and My according to the status they are allotted by the owners. For Glory, there is no special place, for I am everything, example, riches. If riches reach a wicked man, they create everywhere, ever. The fiery nature of Fire is I Myself. I am vanity, pride, cruelty and contempt. If they are with a good Life in all Living Beings. I am the strength of the strong, the man, they are directed along the paths of charity and good strength that is free from greed and lust. Mine is the nature works. Physical strength is used by the wicked to injure which prompts beings to desire Dharmic things and means. others while the good use is to protect others from harm.”
Geetha Vahini 129 130 Geetha Vahini Another point has to be noted here. Krishna said that He has no relationship with them and that He is above and even krodha (anger) and lobha (greed) which are not beyond that for which He is the Cause. opposed to Dharma are Forms of Expression of the Divine. You might infer that man too is not in the least Therefore, why repeat it a thousand times. All feelings, all responsible for the good and the evil that is done through forms, all things and beings are born out of the Para (higher) him by the Divine, that his real nature is beyond both good and the Apara (lower) nature of the selfsame Divine Essence. and evil, that his acts, however evil, were basically prompted But to have higher feelings and emotions, he must accustom by the Lord Himself, for man has nothing he can claim as himself to see My Form in the higher feelings, higher forms his act. True, but faith in this attitude that “nothing is done and higher beings. Still you must not get away with the idea by you,” that “it is all the Lord’s will that is being worked that only the higher is Divine and the lower is not. That is through you,” must be steady, sincere, deep and unshaken. not correct; the objective world with all its Sathwik, Rajasik, There should be no trace of ego. If that is so, then certainly Thamasik things, reactions, impulses—all originate in God. such a one has attained the highest goal of life. He is blessed This conviction can grow in you and get firmly fixed only to the uttermost. That reality has to be known. That by reasoning it out and getting its truth affirmed. knowledge has to be stabilised. Indeed he, who has the conviction that all this is God, that he has no sort of The Lord Himself declared: “Arjuna! All this originated relationship or kinship with the objective world, that he is from Me, all this exists in Me, but I am not dependent on all above and beyond it, is the Sathya-Jivi, the individual whose this; remember. I am unattached to all this.” Here, there are sojourn here has been worthwhile. two points of view: the Jivi point of view and the Lord’s Words however are futile. You may repeat like a parrot point of view. The Jivi has the dual experience of good and that which has been taught for long, certain set phrases, bad, the Lord has no duality at all. When all is God, when like, “Everything is the Lord’s,” “I am but a puppet; He God is the inner Atma in all, how can there be two, one pulls the strings and I dance as He wills,” “Nothing is mine; good and another bad? I am just carrying out His Will.” But what do you usually Now, ordinary folk may get some doubts on this point. do? When a praiseworthy act is done, you claim it to be The Lord says that all things both good and bad originated your own. When a blameworthy act is done, you ascribe it from Him and that He is the Prime Cause. But at the same to the prompting of the Lord! You shout from platforms till time, He declares that He is neither bound nor affected by your throats get dry, that you won by your own effort, the effects or defects of all that has thus originated! He says honour, fame, status and standards, authority and position,
Geetha Vahini 131 132 Geetha Vahini property and possessions, attainments and achievements. Variety). Ignore the shape, the form and the name—the pot But when it comes to confessing your share in earning ill is just clay. Ignore the form of the cloth and the name; fame and defeat, evil and wrong, you conveniently transfer observe the basic thing that stays in and through the cloth, the responsibility to the Lord, saying, “I am but an instrument then you know it is but yarn. Without clay you can have no in His Hands, He is the Master, I am but a Tool”! This has pot. Without yarn, there can be no cloth. So too, without become the habit of man today. Nay, it has developed into Brahman, there can be no Prakruthi. It is truer to say that all a fashion. People swing from “I” to “He” like the pendulum is Brahman than to say, “Brahman-is-in-everything.” It is of the clock. This is sheer deceit, hollow spiritual sham. grander to picture Brahman as Sarva-aadhara, the basis of all, rather than to conceive It as Sarvabhutha- Mind, word and act, all three must be filled with the antharaatma, the Inner Reality of all beings. That is the belief that all is His Play. That is the genuine path. It is a Truth. human frailty to separate things as good and evil. To impute this to God is sacrilege. It might appear sometimes that the Lord too has that weakness, but it is a passing phase, a cloud that hides His Glory, not a blemish that adheres to Him. Though Gunas emanate from the Lord, He is unaffected: smoke arises from fire, but fire is unaffected. Clouds form in the sky and move about in the sky, but the sky is unaffected by them. All are attached to Him, like beads. But He is free, unattached. The Universe is based on Him but he has no need for the Universe as base. Take the example of cloth. Cloth is based on yarn, it is dependent on yarn. But yarn does not depend on cloth; it is unaffected, unattached to cloth. The pot depends on clay, but clay is independent. Again, cloth is yarn, pot is clay. Clay is Brahman, the pot is Prakruthi. Yarn is Brahman, cloth is Prakruthi, (the Universe of Namaroopa, of Manifold
Geetha Vahini 134 Geetha Vahini the steadfastness needed. He persisted until he got from Krishna an answer that was verifiable by experience, that was in accordance with the wisdom enshrined in the Sastras. So, the Lord too provided the answers immediately, with a smile! For this question, on faulty vision, Krishna had the answer. He said, “Listen, Arjuna! Between Me and this Universe, there moves Maya, called Delusion. It is indeed a hard task for man to see beyond Maya, for Maya too is CHAPTER XIII Mine. It is of the same substance; you cannot deem it separate from Me. It is My creation and under My control. It will T turn in a trice, even the mightiest among men, head over his Universe itself is a superstructure, the basis heels! You might wonder why it is so difficult to overcome. being Paramatma, Godhead; this is apparent, Of course, it is by no means easy. Only those who are the other is the Real. People ignore the basis wholeheartedly attached to Me can conquer this, My Maya. and crave for the ‘based.’ They do not stop to inquire how Arjuna, do not take Maya to mean some ugly thing that has the ‘based’ can exist without a base! This too is an example descended from somewhere else. It is an attribute of the of faulty vision. When this Drishti-dosha (error of vision) mind. It makes you ignore the True and the Eternal is set right, Srishti-kartha (the creator) can be seen. When Paramatma, and value instead the attributeful, created, the defect in the vision is removed, the author of this Universe manifold multiplicity of Name and Form. It causes the error can be cognised. of believing the Body as the Self, instead of the Embodied (the Deha instead of the Dehi). Maya is not something that This subject was raised by Arjuna before Krishna. He was and will disappear; nor is it something that was not, but asked, “What exactly is faulty vision? Please tell me in detail, later came in and is. It never was, or is, or will be. O Krishna.” He also sought to know how the fault originates and develops. Now, Arjuna is not just an ordinary individual. “Maya is a name for a non-existent phenomenon. But He is not one to nod his head, whatever is told to him. He is this non-existent thing comes within view! It is like the mirage bold enough to stop Krishna in the middle of a sentence if in the desert, a sheet of water that never was or is. He who he feels a doubt rising in his mind. He had the courage and knows the truth does not see it; only those ignorant with the
Geetha Vahini 135 136 Geetha Vahini ways of the desert are drawn by it. They run towards it and birth and death are all characteristics of the body. They are suffer grief, exhaustion and despair. Like darkness arising all an-Atma, un-Atmic. They are not the characteristics of in the room hiding the room itself, like moss growing on the the Universal, the Atma. water hiding the water itself, like cataract growing in the “To believe that the Universal which is you is limited eye, hiding the vision, Maya too attaches itself to whoever and subject to all these un-Atmic characteristics, that is Maya. helps it to grow. It overpowers the three Gunas and the But remember, Maya dare not approach anyone who has three gods. That is to say, all who identify themselves with taken refuge in Me. For those who fix their attention on the limited, the named, the formed, the individualised, are Maya, it operates as a vast oceanic obstacle. But for those affected by it. Jiva-bhranthi (identification with Jiva) brings who fix their attention on God, Maya will present itself as it about; Thathwa-bhranthi (identification with the Thath Madhava (God)! The hurdle of Maya can be crossed either thwam, (That-this entity) removes it. It hides the thathwa; it by developing the attitude of oneness with the Infinite God does not hold sway over those who have once known the or the attitude of complete surrender to the Lord. The first thathwa. is called Jnana Yoga, the second is named Bhakthi Yoga. “Arjuna, you might ask Me whether this Maya which “All men do not get the inner prompting to conquer pervades and injures the very place where it originates has Maya, by surrendering their all to the Lord. It depends on not tarnished Me, in whom it has taken birth. It is natural the merit or demerit, accumulated during many births. Those that such a doubt should arise. But that is a baseless doubt. who have only demerit as their earnings will pursue the Maya is the cause of all this Jagath (creation) but it is not fleeting pleasures of the senses. Like the birds and the beasts, the cause of God. I am the Authority that wields Maya. they revel in food and frolic. They take these as the purpose This Jagath which is the product of Maya moves and behaves of life. They do not entertain any thoughts of God. They according to My Will. So, whoever is attached to Me and dislike the company of the virtuous and the good. They acts according to My Will cannot be harmed by Maya. Maya stray away from good acts. They become outlaws from the acknowledges their authority also. To overcome Maya, the realm of God. only method is to acquire the Jnana (wisdom) of the Universal, and to rediscover your own Universal nature. “On the other hand, those who have earned merit strive For, you attribute the limit of life on that which is eternal to grow in virtue, in uplifting thoughts, in the contemplation and it is this which causes Maya. Hunger and thirst are the of the Divine Presence and they yearn for the Lord. Seekers characteristics of life. Joy and grief, impulse and imagination, such as these may be drawn to the Lord through suffering
Geetha Vahini 137 138 Geetha Vahini or want or the thirst for knowledge or keenness to acquire The first three of the types of Bhakthas mentioned in wisdom. But the fact that they turn towards the Lord for the Geetha—the Aartha, the Artha-arthi, and the Jijnasu— relief shows that they have grown into the higher path through all adore the Lord in an implicit form, as Paroksha (invisible, many births.” imperceptible). They seek the Lord as a means for the realisation of their desires or goals. Of course, they will The Geetha does not approve Sakama Karmas, acts always be in prayerful and worshipful mood and remembering done with intention to benefit therefrom or with the result as the Lord at all times. the prime motive. It is only Nishkama Karma, acts done without being concerned with the benefit that may accrue, The Jnani, the fourth type mentioned in the Geetha, that will free you from delusion. has Eka (one) Bhakthi, while the others have Aneka (not one, many) Bhakthi. The others are attached to the objects Now, a doubt may arise about the Aartha-bhaktha, or the states they desire and for their sake, are attached to the one who turns to the Lord to relieve his suffering. The the Lord also. They are devoted not merely to the Lord, but question may be raised whether such a person can be called to the objective world also. The Jnani will not raise his eyes a Bhaktha. There is no single person on earth who is free towards anything other than the Lord. Even if he does, he from some want or other. Each depends on some one or sees the Lord wherever his eyes are cast. That is the reason other to fulfil his wants, is it not? Now, to have such wants, why the Lord has declared that the Jnani is the dearest to wants relating to objects, is itself wrong; and to lean on a Him. Of course, all are the same for the Lord. But among man like oneself to fulfil them is an even greater wrong. The those who have reached His Presence and are present there, Aartha-bhaktha turns, not to man, but to the Lord whom he Prema (love) is explicit, prathyaksha, immediate, directly trusts and reveres. He implores Him only to fulfil them. cognisable and experienceable. Therefore, it can be inferred Though it is wrong to cultivate wants, he avoids the greater that the Jnani is nearest to the Lord and so, the dearest. wrong of putting trust on inferior instruments. So he is superior, is it not? The superiority of this attitude can be Of course, it is the nature of fire to warm you up when seen, when you know that it is not what you want that is you shiver from cold. But how can it help you to keep important, but whom you ask for its fulfilment. The goal is warm if you do not approach it but keep away at a distance? the Lord. He is the Giver. His Grace alone can confer boons. Similarly, those who are earnest to remove the chillness of When this faith is fixed, you can be certain that the Aartha- worldly ills have to seek the fire of Jnana, which is won by bhaktha is really worthy. the Grace of God and be in the immediacy of God.
Geetha Vahini 139 140 Geetha Vahini The Sadhakas in the midst of their efforts sometimes ordinary train and since the carriage he is in is neither imagine God to be less glorious than He really is! They feel “through” or one in a through train, he has to alight at a that the Lord differentiates between sinners and saints, good number of places en route and wait until another train comes and bad, jnanis and ajnanis. These are unsound inferences. by, so that he can reach the goal by stages. It is a long and The Lord does not separate men thus. If He really did so, arduous journey. But in spite of those difficulties, it can be no sinner can survive His anger on earth for even a minute. accomplished by the Aartha if he persists. The goal is attained All are living on the earth, since the Lord has no such by all; only the process and the pace are different. No wonder distinction. This truth is known only to the Jnani. Others are the Lord has declared more than once that all these four unaware of this. They suffer under the false belief that the types of Bhakthas are “My Own.” Why has He so declared? Lord is somewhere far, far away from them. Because they all seek the same High Goal. The Jnani is free from Maya. He is unaffected by the “Therefore, yearn always for the Vast, the Gunas: Rajas, Thamas or even Sathwa. The Jijnasu, the Immeasurable. Do not limit your desires to the little. They seeker of Knowledge, however is different. He uses his time are misers who crave for little things. Those who yearn for for unbroken contemplation of the Divine, in pious deeds the Lord are generous, large-hearted,” said Krishna. and holy thoughts. The other two, the Artha-arthi and the The Bhakthi or Devotion of the Jnani is what is termed Aartha, they gather elevating experience and ruminate over Sahaja Bhakthi, direct bhakthi. The bhakthi of the others the real and the unreal and transform themselves into Jijnasus, can be called Gouna Bhakthi or derived bhakthi, indirect seekers of knowledge. Later, they become Jnanis, and are bhakthi. The Jnani cognises the Lord as his own Atma. His saved. The goal is reached thus, stage by stage. You cannot bhakthi is anu-rakthi, attachment towards or affection for attain the goal in one leap. God. ‘Poojyaeshvanura-ago Bhakthi,’ it is said: affection This can be better understood by an example: Jnana is towards the venerable is bhakthi, said Krishna. The Jnani like the “through train.” That is to say, the passenger need becomes so as a result of the merit accumulated through not detrain and enter another train to reach the destination. many lives. It is not a stage attainable on the spur of the The Jijnasu has entered the “through carriage”; he too need moment, nor is it available readymade in shops for a price. not detrain and board another train, but the carriage will be It is not a marketable commodity. It is the culmination of detained and attached to other trains en route. He reaches at the spiritual endeavour practised in many lives. It is desired last the place he wants to reach. The Aartha boards the that many good doctors must be produced for ministering
Geetha Vahini 141 142 Geetha Vahini to the people. But years of study and experience alone can sentences (like a magician and his ball of thread), pouring supply them. If those unequipped are appointed as doctors out what has earlier been swallowed. We have large numbers in the hospitals and if they start prescribing and operating, of such self-styled Jnanis going about now. Their dress is they are bound to kill where they should cure. So too, if a ochre, but their hearts are ogre. Well, how can stones shine person has become a Jnani today, you can imagine the years as gems? All stones are not precious stones. Who will assess and years of sadhana (spiritual discipline) that won for him a stone as equal to a gem? Only fools will be so misled. For that height. The inheritance of spiritual impulses from they know neither the one nor the other. previous births also helps his endeavour. Sri Krishna declared the King of Manthras, All kinds of people now name themselves as Jnanis. “Vaasudevassarvam” (God is all this) in the Geetha, just to They do not know, perhaps, that a Jnani is marked by certain counteract such pseudo-Jnanis, whose emergence He characteristics. The mark that proves him genuine is, of anticipated. That one Manthra is sufficient to save all course, his declaration based on his own experience that mankind. That is His Indirect Gift; consider it as such and “Vaasudevas-sarvamidam,” “Vaasudeva (God) is all this.” concentrate on it and its meaning. That is the highest good. The steady assimilation of that experience is the true sign of That is the highest goal. Without the inner ever-present the Jnani. By Vaasudeva is meant here not the son of experience of those words, there are many who have named Vasudeva, but He who has made all beings His Home, His themselves Mahatma, Jagadguru, Bhagawan, Paramahamsa, Nivaasa (Residence). It is only a person who perceives the Jnani, Thyagi, Ananda, etc. and who alas, though counterfeit, Lord in all beings that deserves to be called a Jnani. Instead, receive currency among people as genuine. No one conferred if others name themselves as Jnanis, they are so only in these titles on them. They were selected and assumed by name. They have no genuine experience of Jnana. What their present owners and worn as plumage to catch the exactly is that Jnana? It is the possession of that knowledge people’s eye. They are not genuine and so the glamour too which enables you to have knowledge of all and so enables wears out soon enough. The exterior is Sanyas (asceticism), you to dispense with the knowledge of all else. but the interior is Athyaas (too full of desires). Outwardly This is the height which the Jnani reaches. On the other the form is Yoga, but inwardly they suffer from Roga, hand, no one can claim to be a Jnani who has simply learnt (Disease). Their names all speak of Ananda but they roam a few slokas by heart, or skipped through a few books, or around in the alleys. Their words are honey. Their acts are ascended platforms with ten others and lectured for hours spoony and often zany. A householder who is immersed in in the full pride of scholarship, reeling off ponderous the daily duties of his stage of life is far better spiritually
Geetha Vahini 143 144 Geetha Vahini than these dressed-up specimens of Thyaga (detachment, Krishna was referring to such real Jnanis when He said surrender) and Yoga. that the World will shine in splendour through the Jnanis. A man, without Jnana, is a home without light. The chief reason for the decline of the culture of India, of its ancient way of life and its moral rectitude is this: the evil perpetrated by such fakes. Faith in God has declined for the same reason. They advise Thyaga (renunciation) and aspire for Bhoga (luxury). They glorify morality and operate through hatred. This behaviour cuts at the very root of Sanyasa. They inevitably rush towards doom. Where words and deeds are not co-ordinated, there is no trace of Truth. Well, householders do hold on to truth, more or less tenaciously. There are among them many who are devoid of hate, of pure unsullied hearts, and who tread the path of morality and virtue. But we find that the Thyagis and Yogis who parade as such are full of all possible types of hatred and all the manifestations of desire. They fall into the pit which these dig for trapping them. Egoism, envy, exhibitionism—these bring to end all the efforts of the Sadhaka. Therefore, seekers and devotees must be ever vigilant. They must keep away from all these undesirable traits and they should try to grow in the contemplation of the Glory of God, and in the practice of morality, eagerly striving to experience the real Bliss of Attainment. This Bliss has then to be shared with the world. That will inaugurate World Peace and World Prosperity.
Geetha Vahini 146 Geetha Vahini There are two paths by which man can approach this Abheda Jnana; the inner and the outer. The outer sadhana is “Nishkama Karma,” engaging in activity without attachment towards the result of those activities as dedicated to the Lord. The inner sadhana is Dhyana (meditation) and Samadhi (equipoise, devoid of ups and downs). In Vedanthic terminology, this is named Nididhyasana. Listen and meditate on what you have listened to—those two steps are the bases of this Nididhyasana or Inner Concentration. CHAPTER XIV Without these, Dhyana is impossible of achievement. This is the meaning of what is called Atma-samyama, “ the control of the senses, detachment from the outer sensory Nahi Jnanena Sadrsam.” There is nothing to world, the withdrawal of the mind from the outer world. equal Jnana. And what is Jnana? That which This is the goal of all life, knowing the Paramatma, attaining makes you cross this sea of flux, this samsara. Liberation. There can be no second aim for man. Man is Of course, it is of two kinds. The first is objective knowledge endowed with life, not as a means for building bungalows, (Vishaya Jnana) and the second, integral knowledge, or the acquisition of estates, the accumulation of wealth, the Abheda Jnana. addition of progeny, the earning of titles or ascent into higher The first type is knowledge of the world. The second rungs of social life. His greatness does not depend on these. is the knowledge of the identity of Brahman and the individual The chief success of life lies in the winning of permanent Atma, which is called Abheda or undifferentiated or integral bliss, permanent escape from grief and agitation. Jnana. This Jnana is not a function of the intellect or Buddhi. “Srinvanthu viswe amruthasya puthraah!” is the call. It is a feature of something beyond it, something which witnesses the activities of even the Buddhi. It destroys the “Listen, O Ye, children of immortality, all over the world!” delusion about this constant flux, mistaken to be a reality. It That is the invitation. The heritage of immortality must be removes fear from the heart of man. It reveals to him the recognised and experienced. It must be won back. The bonds Brahman which he and all this is. So it is called the Right of name and form must be got rid of. They are but bonds Jnana or Samyak Jnana, the Sameepa Jnana or the Nearest made of dream-stuff. They are changeful and temporary. Jnana. They are not genuine, natural characteristics of the Jiva.
Geetha Vahini 147 148 Geetha Vahini Real wisdom consists in recognising that man is pure bliss, but disappointment? How can joy be won by such pursuits? bliss that persists from the past into the present and the If joy is not won and grief avoided, how can liberation be future. Escape from grief for a brief period of time, and the achieved?” Krishna asked. attainment of joy for a short time. These are not signs of Then Arjuna intervened. “Krishna,” he said, “cannot real Liberation. “If you seek this steady, genuine, pure state of bliss, you must be attached to Me,” said Krishna. such men attain you? You say that grief must be conquered before one can attain you. Well, what is the origin of that “Arjuna! Whoever does spiritual practice after attaching grief? How is it to be tackled? How does it arise? How can himself to Me with a view to liberate himself from old age one try to overcome it without knowing its origin and course and senility will know all-that-is-to-be-known of Brahman, of development? Please tell me how this grief arises in the Karma and Atma. I am master of Adhibhutha (the highest human mind?” among the physically manifest), Adhidaiva (the supreme among gods) and Adhiyajna (the presiding deity of “Listen, Arjuna,” Krishna condescended to reply. “The sacrifice) and if I am thus worshipped, the worshipper will source of all types of sorrow is Ignorance, Ajnana. You develop equanimity and full control of the vagaries of the might ask Me now what is the source of Ajnana? I shall tell mind. Besides, such a person will dwell on Me, without you. It is the identification with the body, the delusion that forgetting Me, even in his last moments. For that reason, he you are the body. This can be removed only by the will reach Me too. That is to say, he will merge in Me. acquisition of right knowledge. To remove darkness, light “Arjuna! Everyone is anxious to avoid old age and is what is needed. You cannot frighten it away, nor can you death. It is human nature so to be anxious. But of what avail make it yield by prayer or petition or protest. Unless light is is mere anxiety? One’s conduct and behaviour should be in on, darkness will not disappear, howsoever you may try. accordance with one’s objective. If one has sincere yearning So too, Ajnana will not disappear by merely wishing for and if one places full trust and faithfully surrenders to the disappearance to happen. Once you understand the nature Lord, the fog of grief will be dispersed by the rays of His and ramifications of this trait, this Ajnana, the truth will be Grace. If on the other hand one places his trust on the objects laid bare and grief will vanish. of this world, the consequent grief will never end; nor can they be ended by any other than the Lord. Serve the Master “When Ajnana goes, grief too goes. So attach yourself of Maya, the Designer of all this Dreamland rather than the to Me and earn the light of True Knowledge and tread the Dream itself. How can attachment to delusion yield anything path of No-grief,” said Krishna.
Geetha Vahini 149 150 Geetha Vahini Immediately, Arjuna interjected, “Krishna! You were declines or ends. It is Param Aksharam, the Highest saying till now of certain paths by which we can reach you. Indestructible, Indescribable. Now, at the end of it all, if you throw this cannon ball, how “The Goal of Humanity is to attain that Brahman; can I ever grasp its meaning? You did not even confer, as a Aksharam and Brahman signify the same Goal. They indicate preliminary, a little power to do so! Please therefore make the Saguna (with form) and the Nirguna (formless) aspects me happy by describing this point in greater detail, so that I of the same Truth. For Akshara means also a letter, the might follow You better and attain You.” Pranava, Om, which is a symbol of Brahman. That is why it Krishna replied, “My dear brother-in-law! Listen. My is called Akshara Para Brahma Yoga (The eternal changeless mystery can be understood, once you are clear about the supreme yoga). Brahman has two adjectives, Paramam and meaning of Brahman, Aadhyaathmam (The Paramatma), Aksharam. Akshara indicates the Pranava as well as Maya. Karma, Adhi-bhootham (The supreme in the physical), Adhi- Maya too is subsumed by Pranava. These two are daivam (The supreme among gods) and Adhiyajnam (The ‘attributeful,’ qualified, Savisesha. Brahman, however, is presiding deity of sacrifices). Let Me tell you this also. Nirvisesha, qualificationless, attributeless, pure, in its own Whoever understands My mystery attains Me.” right. He who understands this attains Me. “Then, O Lord, tell me about the first of these, “Now for a second point. It is Brahman that dwells in Brahman,” exclaimed Arjuna. every body in the form of ‘I.’ In fact, every body hangs around this entity called ‘I.’ In the body, each part and “Arjuna! Aksharam-Brahma Paramam”—Brahman is organ in the organisation performs one chief task. Each sense referred to as the Akshara which is param. Akshara means contacts and informs about one particular set of impressions without kshara or destruction, indestructible. Brahman comes from the outer world. But though related to the senses, there from a root which means big, vast, etc. How vast, you may is an ‘I’ shining in the body, above and behind all of them. ask. Vaster than whatever you call vast, that is the answer. If that relationship is broken, everything becomes inert The word Akshara has another meaning also. It means material! omnipresent, immanent everywhere. Brahman is not mere Aksharam, as you will have noticed. It is Param Aksharam. “When the ‘I’-power flows through the senses, they What does that mean? It is that type of Akshara which is are able to carry on their allotted tasks. That power is beyond the reach of Time and Space and knowability. It Aadhyaathmam. It cannot be known without great effort. cannot be known by any or all the categories. It never Use the sharpest discrimination and you know it to some
Geetha Vahini 151 152 Geetha Vahini small extent. Brahman is the ‘Thath’ entity; Aadhyaathmam answer is, it is the body that dies. It is the body that falls. is the ‘Thwam’ entity. To make the matter clearer to you What does not die is the Atma. Only you delude yourselves take these two as appearance and character, form and into thinking that it is the Atma or “you” that dies. The substance. Brahman is the form, Aadhyaathmam is Atma has nothing to do with death or birth. The body substance,” said Krishna. experiences death; the Atma which is Nithya, Sathya, and Nirmala—Eternal, True and Pure—does not die. You are Let us dwell on this matter a little. The Sastras describe the Atma that does not like to die. That is to say, you are Brahman as Sath-chith-ananda. This is a way of denoting it, Sath; your nature is Sath. The Atma is the “Child of in Vedanthic vocabulary. It is also described as Asthi-Bhathi- Immortality,” not the Deha or the Body. The Atma is the priyam. Are both the same? Or do they mean differently? Sath, not the Body. Sath means that which persists in the past, present and future. The same meaning is conveyed by the word, Asthi. Chith You are the Sath—the Atma, the entity that has no means that which is conscious of everything. The same death. It is this Atma that is in every casement and so, every meaning is conveyed by the word, Bhathi. Ananda means being feels the force of that Sath in the form of eternal unending source of joy. Priyam also means the same. These unchanging Existence. This is clear and unmistakable. three are found in every human being, why, in every beast Now, take the second: Chith—the force that urges you and bird. on to know everything. Everyone is eager to know about Take the first of these—Sath—and this will become anything that is apparent to his consciousness. He asks the clearer. The body is subject to destruction, sooner or later. questions: “What is this? How does this happen?” The Everyone is aware of this. No one is ignorant of this number who actually succeed in knowing may be only a elementary fact. Nevertheless, everyone is apprehensive of few. Others may have the eagerness only and not the steady death! No one welcomes death, or is eager to meet it. Death intelligence needed to persist and win. That makes no is inevitable. You have to meet with it, even though you do difference. The essential fact is the thirst, the urge. not welcome it, or try to avoid it. All that is born has to die Take a little boy with you when you go to the market some day. Still, no one likes to die. or the bazaar or an exhibition. You will note that the boy What is the key to this paradox? Note this: What is it does not simply move along seeing the various things on that does not welcome death? What is it that meets with both sides. He will be continuously asking the person who death? What is it that leaves and what is it that remains? The is leading him by the hand, what this is and what is that. It
Geetha Vahini 153 154 Geetha Vahini may be something he does not need or something that is suffers from any illness and the doctor prescribes a medicine beyond his power of understanding. But yet, the stream of to cure it and make him whole, man wants even that to be questions will not get dry. sweet, soothing and pleasant! Just consider the inner significance of this hunger for What is at the root of this desire? Man is fundamentally knowledge. It is the Chith Shakthi (power of consciousness) happy-natured, Sukha-swabhava. Bliss is his very that expresses itself. It is not its nature to leave things alone. personality. He is not of the nature of the body he occupies. It cannot rest until knowledge is gained. So, the hunger He is the Atma. Happiness is the nature of the Atma. That is emerges as a stream of questions. The Chith Shakthi is self- why no one is surprised when you are happy. They are not luminous. So it has the power of illuminating even inert inquisitive about your happiness, for it is something natural things. That is why these qualities shine in man and make to you. Surprise arises only when you observe something other things clearer to him. This is enough to make it plain that was not there before. What you see every day does not that man has in him the Principle of Intelligence or Chith arouse your curiosity. It comes only when something Shakthi. unnatural happens or is observed. Now for the third: Anandam. Even beasts and birds crave for joy without any prompting or persuasion from Take this instance. A child is in the cradle. It playfully others. They make every effort to win it. Not one of them laughs at either the jingling of bells or some toy or perhaps craves for grief or pain. They make every effort to escape some sensation which is pleasant enough to make it bloom. from pain and grief and put an end to them, when they No one is surprised or worried at all this. No one loses his become unavoidable. peace of mind as a result of this. Now, let the child that was playing and laughing, start shrieking and weeping—everyone As for man, no further elaboration is necessary. He within earshot will run towards the cradle and frantically seeks unbroken joy, at all times and in all acts and activities. search the bed and bedclothes to discover the causes of all At no time, at no place, at no stage of life, does he desire this commotion. This is the experience of all who have grief. He prays for the joy and happiness of himself and his something to do with children. No one was worried to find kindred through whatever worship he offers, or whatever Bhajan (spiritual singing) he shares in, or whatever vows out the reason why the child was happy, but all sought for he fulfils or rites he performs, or pilgrimages he undertakes the cause when it wept. Why? Because Ananda or joy is its or gifts he makes for spiritual merit. Why? When the body nature, grief is unnatural, against its inner composition.
Geetha Vahini 155 156 Geetha Vahini This is not the entire point. There is something more. Karma, My Sankalpa (Divine Will). And as long as My Let us take another example from experience. When some Resolution lasts, the stream of karma will flow along. It can friend or kinsman of yours is happy and affluent, no one never go dry so long as I do not will it. All that you do is to takes the trouble to inquire from him why he is so happy. get drawn into this flood. Why, you are but currents in this They ignore him and do not harry him with questions rush, or ripples or waves. My will has prompted all karma regarding himself. But when grief strikes him and he is and so, karma done in consonance with My will, becomes unhappy, you start worrying him and yourselves. Why? part of Me. Happiness is natural, it is to be expected, it is nothing surprising. For it is the nature of the Atma, which everyone is. That is why one is craving for constant happiness, Ananda. The above three, Sath, Chith and Ananda, we see in every being as the very core of its very existence, as its reality itself. So it is the Lord Himself who has assumed the Jiva pose and plays as an individual in that role. It is this inner meaning that Krishna elaborated upon, so that the relationship of the Brahman and Aadhyathmam, that is to say, the identity of both with Him could be understood by Arjuna. Then, Arjuna prayed that the third subject, karma, may be fully explained to him. Krishna was quite ready to oblige him. He began, “Arjuna! The limitation that is necessary for the creation, fostering and destruction of beings is what is called karma. The movable and the immovable, all are beings. Why, the very act of the very resolution of Creation is karma, the very first, which still activates all everywhere— this entire Universe and all the movements and agitations and activities in it are the direct consequence of Primal
Geetha Vahini 158 Geetha Vahini Hence, the appropriateness, the interest and value of this dialogue. Arjuna was not content to leave the matter at that. He did not accept Krishna’s assurance. “Tell me about the remaining three also, O Lord,” he pleaded. “Save me from the coils of doubt,” he prayed. “Destroy the darkness and reveal to me Your Reality,” he insisted. At this Krishna melted a little. He fondly stroked Arjuna’s back and replied, “Do not grieve; I shall tell you all. Adhibhutham, about which I CHAPTER XV mentioned, is not such a formidable tangle. It is something quite within the reach of all. Everything that declines and “ dies, everything that has roopa and nama, form and name, Karma is of My Nature; I manifest Myself as is included in Adhibhutham. Karma,” said Krishna, to the great consternation of Arjuna. He made it clear that all karma is Divine, “To put it in other words, Adhibhutham is Apara of His Essence! “It is enough if you know that Brahman— Prakruthi (the evanescent and transitory aspect of God); all the Universal, Atma—the Individual, and Karma, all three these embodied things, on this side and on the other and are in Me. Knowledge of this will confer release. You need everywhere are Adhibhutham. In spite of this, they are not not worry about the rest,” said Krishna, as if He wanted to different from Me,” said Krishna, pausing meaningfully. He avoid further discussion. Evidently, Krishna wanted to take did not continue the exposition! the chariot into the ranks of the foes and start the conflict, for time was flying fast. The ways of the Lord are known only to Him. No one else can make out their meaning and purpose. Attempting But Arjuna was adamant. He was different. Ordinary to unravel them is a fruitless task. men would not have argued even so long with Krishna. When Krishna says, “Do not worry about the rest,” one should “They are not different from Me!” At these words, stop worrying. But Arjuna was the right interrogator for Arjuna was petrified with surprise. His head became heavy Krishna and Krishna was the right teacher for Arjuna. In with doubt. His intelligence was befogged. His conviction fact, they are Nara-Narayana (man and God), is it not? was shaken. Doubts multiplied in his brain in frightening
Geetha Vahini 159 160 Geetha Vahini sequence. Why did he suffer like this? What was the reason emerged from Agni or the Fire-element, and Agni from Vayu for all this upset? (air, wind), and Vayu from Akasa (air from space) and the Akasa from the Maya (space or ether from God’s delusion After declaring “I am the Sath-chith-ananda, the Sathya- power) of Godhead! That Maya is merely My apparel. nithya (Eternal Truth) entity,” “I am unaffected by Death, Decline or Destruction,” Krishna made the devastating “My Apparel, which I willed and folded around Me admission that He was the temporary, transitional, became Akasa, the Akasa got transformed into Vayu, the destructible deha (material body) also! This was the cause Vayu changed into Agni, the Agni into Jala (water), and Jala of all this confusion in Arjuna’s brain! Anyone would be became Prithvi or Earth, the Earth grew grains of food, the confounded by doubt at these conflicting statements. food developed into the body! So, it is clear is it not, that Krishna laughed as He saw Arjuna’s plight. the Deha too is Myself? Why doubt this? Still, since He had no intention of causing delay, and “Therefore, I am Adhibhutham also, as much as I am, since He knew the source of Arjuna’s dilemma, Krishna as I said before, Brahman, Aadhyathmam (substance) and immediately set about resolving the doubt. “Arjuna! Why Karma. The cause is the same as the effect. I am the Primal do you feel lost? You are confounded, because I said I am Cause and so, I am all these effects also. I am the Paramatma; the short-lived deha too, is it? Common folk will be shocked the rest are all Adhidaivam. In every physical citadel or body, on hearing this. Their reaction will be to reject the idea, for the Divine Personality named Hiranyagarbha (The Golden it is difficult to reconcile the two. This deha which is Womb, primal cause) is immanent. Just as a man is served temporary, transitional, and transient, has affinity with Me; by his senses, the Hiranyagarbha is served by the Adhidaivas for I am the base from which it springs. Without Me, the (Deific). deha or body can never be. This will become clear to you, on a resume of its origin. Listen to the story of the origins “You might wonder what the role of these Adhidaivas of the body, which clarifies the mystery. The body is is! They are Deities that serve the Divine Purpose; that is to primarily indebted for its emergence to the food (anna) say, the eye is illumined by Surya (Sun), the ear by the that the parents consume, is it not? Where did that Anna Deities of the Quarters, Indra motivates the hand—these come from? From the Earth-element: the grains and other and other presiding deities are the senses of Hiranyagarbha. materials which grew on the earth. And the Earth? The However great a Sadhaka might be, whatever eminence he Prithvi-element? It evolved from Jala Thathwa, the Water- might have reached, he can attain the Highest only through element. Tracing back, we find that the Jala Thathwam Hiranyagarbha. Hiranyagarbha is indeed Godhead; there is
Geetha Vahini 161 162 Geetha Vahini no distinction between the two. Is this clear, Arjuna? I am the Kartha, the motivator is the same, viz., the electric current. as much Adhidaivam as I am Adhi-bhutham (all these The expressions, the manifestations may be different. But embodied things). As much as these two I am Brahman, the basis, the inspiration, the latent potency, the base is the Aadhyaathmam (substance) and Karma. They are all fully same. Divine. Like the current, Godhead too operates through all “Now for the next entity—Adhiyajnam (activator of instruments, and awards the consequences of all the activities all karmas) That is also Me! This is the entity that consumes of all the instruments. He is the Daatha (giver) of Sarva- joy and grief, the result of the multifarious karmas they are karma-phala (the fruits of all actions). Like the current, He engaged in. I am the recipient of the sabda (sound), sparsa is the inner motivator of all beings, Sarva-bhuthaanthara- (touch), roopa (form), rasa (taste), and gandha (smell); atma (The soul immanent in all beings). Since He is the through the five senses in all beings, the Adhiyajna principle! activator of all karmas, He is called Adhiyajnam. I am not only the Kartha, the entity responsible for the karma; I am also the Bhoktha, the entity for which that karma “The seventh is Pranava (OM), which, when is gone through, the recipient of the fruits. I am the benefactor pronounced at the moment of death, awards merger with as well as the beneficiary.” the Akshara Para Brahman (imperishable absolute) Itself!” When Krishna said this, Arjuna immediately prayed to Him Of course, Krishna was able to open the eyes of Arjuna to elaborate the point a little more, so that he might grasp it and clarify this truth, this fact of His being the Adhiyajna. clearly. Krishna was only too glad to do so. ‘The moment But ordinary intellects may not be able to grasp its of death’ does not mean ‘Some future point of time.’ It implications. It will be easy if we take some illustrations means, ‘this very moment’! Any moment might turn out to from life. When you want breeze, you switch on the fan. When you want light, you switch on the lamp. When you be the ‘moment of death.’ So every moment is the ‘last.’ want to cook, you light the stove. When you want to address Every moment must be filled with Pranava. The fate of man a vast audience, you fix up a mike and loudspeakers and after death is moulded by the thought that predominates at switch them on. Or if it is printing you require, you operate the moment of death. That thought is the foundation on the press with a switch. Consider these as separate which the next birth is built. “Whoever at that time remembers operations and you will notice that they are related to one Me attains My Glory, reaches Me in fact.” declares Krishna. another. Light and air, heat and sound, are unrelated. They So, each karma of man, every striving of his, every sadhana, are distinct in every way, it would seem. But for all these, should be aimed at sanctifying that fateful moment. The
Geetha Vahini 163 164 Geetha Vahini years of life must be devoted to the discipline that will bring Then, Arjuna inquired, “O Lord! Has one to strive for up at that moment the thought of Paramatma or Pranava. it, from now on, if one wishes to get holy thoughts at the last moment of life? Can we not get them at that time itself?” “What has to be discarded is the Deha, this physical The Lord realised his doubt and replied, “Your intelligence case. What has to be earned is Para Brahman, the Universal seems to have been blunted a great deal! For you are Absolute. The Deha has your Reality, your Swaroopam, hesitating to accept the need to develop holy thoughts from the undiscardable, indestructible, undying Sathyam (truth) now on. Arjuna! The mind has to be educated into the habit, and Nithyam (eternal). That Reality is the entity called Atma, through what is called Abhyasa Yoga, the discipline of or what is the same thing, Paramatma. Since you are that, constant practice. It has to be trained to avoid other thoughts you cannot cast it off. Casting off the body is akin to shifting and concentrate on the Lord only. Then only can you reach from a house occupied for some years, and birth is your the Paramapurusha, the Oversoul, the Supreme Spirit. Unless entry into a new one. Both these are physical acts, not you systematically teach it and train it, it will not remember affecting the Atma. Arjuna! The Atma does not come in, the Paramapurusha at the moment of death. nor does it go out. Those who are toiling in the falsehood of Deha Thathwa (the physical) cannot have the Atma “You might ask Me the reason. Well. Think of your revealed to them. The Deha Thathwa is liable to decay and own case. You are able to use these weapons of offence death. Therefore, more than the six items mentioned by Me and defence in the battle that is imminent because you taught already, the Pranava which is such a potent instrument of yourself the art of handling them over many years, is it not? liberation has to be understood clearly. All the long years of Could you have used them with confidence, without life are to be utilised for this consummation—the mind being preparation, on the spur of the moment? Is it ever possible? fixed on Pranava when the body is being cast off. You belch The Kshatriya (warrior) will be called upon to wield weapons the flavour of the food you have taken. Your last thought someday, so he is taught the art from childhood so that he indicates the food you have fed on. may be ready for the emergency. “Your Sadgathi (progress) is in accordance with your “Similarly whatever else a man may not meet with, sadhana (spiritual practice). Progress is in accordance with during life, he is certain to meet with death. So each one practice. Be always aware of the need to fix the mind on must be trained to have at that time the attitude and thought holy thoughts, when the body is got rid of. That is to say, that are most beneficial to him. Otherwise, life is a failure, a immerse yourself in holy thoughts every moment of your waste. A person unready for this consummation has to suffer life.” the fate that will befall him. No one enters a battlefield in
Geetha Vahini 165 166 Geetha Vahini order to suffer defeat. So too, no one voluntarily accepts a the control of the senses, the concentration of the mind, fall. He seeks only progress. Will it not be wise therefore to etc. strive for the end that is in your own best interest? Hence, For, when the mind is flitting from one fancy to another every man must take earnest steps to secure the thought of how can the production of a sound Om, Om, by the vocal the seventh item, Pranava, at the last moment of life. Whoever organs be of any benefit? The sound will not help the dies in that thought attains Me,” said Krishna. attainment of Liberation. The senses have to be curbed, This is the entire essence of the Geetha. For the goal thoughts have to be one-pointed, the Glory has to be for all man’s actions is to attain the acme of progress, is it apprehended. That is why the Lord advised that from birth not? That is the urge which makes him engage himself in to death, one must be engaged in the search for Truth. prayers, in Japam (recitation of name of God) and Dhyanam Instead, if you postpone sadhana until the last moment, you (meditation), in Archana and Thapas (austerity). All those will be like the student who turns over the pages of his who have placed faith in these have to remember the Goal textbook for the first time, just before he enters the throughout. examination hall! If the student feels that he has before him one full year and if he neglects to learn from the teacher and Krishna said that Om or Pranava has to be remembered from lecture notes and from books, how can anything enter at the moment of Death. There are certain points that require his brain when he opens the pages of his book that very elucidation in connection with this for there are many who morning? It will only add to his despair. He can be argue that the Pranava can be repeated only by a few and pronounced proficient only in indolence. that others are not entitled to it. This is wrong. This false conclusion has been arrived at since they do not know the No tree will yield fruits the moment you plant the truth. It springs from a mistaken belief. seedling in your backyard. To reach that stage, you have to foster it with care over a long period of time, is it not? The Geetha does not mention this group or that group, Similarly, whatever result you seek, you have to follow Krishna declares “whoever,” without any qualifying words, carefully, without break, the preparatory disciplines. No one limiting it to one class or sex. He has not even said, “who can acquire the fruit without vigilance and steadfastness. deserves or who does not deserve,” “who is authorised or who is unauthorised.” He has only said that for meditation Sadhakas (spiritual aspirants) must be always aware on the Pranava, (mere ‘calling it to memory’ is of no use) of this. The yearning must be directed away from “how to some preliminary disciplines have to be gone through, like be born” towards “how to die”! For birth depends on how
Geetha Vahini 167 168 Geetha Vahini death takes place. Death comes first, birth happens later. Folks believe that men are born to die and they die so that they may be born. This is wrong. You are born so that you may not be born again; you die, so that you may not die again. That is to say, the man who dies must so die that he is not born again. When once you die, you should not be born again to meet another death. Death is inevitable if you are born. So, avoid birth and avoid death. So, the Sadhaka should not aspire for a good birth. He should seek a good death. You may be born well, in a good family or with many favourable circumstances. But subsequent karma may not ensure a good death. So, if a good death is aimed at, the trouble of being born and becoming once again subject to death can be avoided. Every man born must have the end always in view. Cultivate good habits of thought and action in order to make that end genuinely auspicious. Attaining such an end is the unmistakable sign of having won the Grace of God.
Geetha Vahini 170 Geetha Vahini in the mind during the sadhana stages and with what feelings and emotions He has to be fixed in the mind. “Arjuna! people describe Me in three different ways: (1) as Nirguna Niraakaara, (2) as Saguna Niraakaara and (3) as Saguna Saakaara. I shall tell you about the second, the Saguna Niraakaara first, and how you have to picture the Lord in this aspect. Listen, He is described as Kavi (poet), Puraanam, Anusaasitha, Subtler than the Subtle, the Sustenance and Basis of All, having Unpicturable CHAPTER XVI Form, with the Splendour of the Sun as His Complexion, beyond all trace of Ignorance and Darkness.” O rdinary folk do not get the mind fixed on At this point, Arjuna interrupted Krishna. He asked, Madhava so easily at the point of death. It “Lord! You said, He is a Kavi! There are Kavis among presupposes long training, previous ordinary mortals too. How then can you call the Lord too a achievement of certain accomplishments, what is called Kavi and discredit Him? Or, does Kavi denote something Purva samskara. The mind must have gone through a certain special when applied to Him? Make that point a little clearer.” course of discipline. It has to be Yogayuktha, possessed of Krishna said, “Kavi does not mean merely a poet. It means Yoga. Even that is not enough. The mind must discard all also one who is aware of the past, present and future; and other thoughts as low and inferior, defiling even. This disgust so it is a description of the Lord. He knows all. He sees all. towards all other objects should grow in strength. When Hence, the derivation of Kavi is mentioned as ‘Sarvajna, these two are present, the thought of Madhava will certainly Kraantha-darsi,’ He who sees the next step. It is the Lord emerge and be steady during the last moments. who revolves in every heart and effects changes from step to step. For all creation, the Kavi is the motivator, the prime So your mind is the important thing. When the mind basis. He is the Poet; His Poem is all this.” Arjuna again rots, all else rots. Man moves as fast as his mind, in the inquired, “Lord, secondly, you said ‘Puraana,’ that He is direction that the mind takes. To tame and train the mind, Puraana, or Ancient. What is the significance of that?” good habits and disciplines have to be sought. Therefore, Krishna replied, “Of course, the Lord is the most ancient, Krishna began describing how the Lord has to be pictured but He is as modern as He is ancient. He is Sanathana,
Geetha Vahini 171 172 Geetha Vahini primeval, beyond the beginning; He is also Noothana, new “This is self-evident. Prithivi or the earth is just every moment. Puraana means puraa navamithi, formerly stationary. Water or Jala is subtler and so, it flows. Agni or new, new every minute of the past, and the present.” Fire is subtler than water and so it rises up. Vayu or Air which is even more subtle can travel on all sides. Akasa has “What about the word, anusaasitha?” just one characteristic, Sabda. It has no touch, or form or taste or scent. The Lord who is beyond these five elements “Independent, unchecked, Master. He lays down the has none of these characteristics. He is subtler than the conduct of all. The Five Elements execute His Orders. They subtlest. He is all-pervasive, immanent in all. It is the cannot overstep the limits laid down by Him. His laws govern characteristic that makes a thing heavy. The Lord has no also the inner world of all beings, as no human law can. He such burden. So, He is subtler than everything else. operates in the regions of the mind.” “Next, about the fifth expression: Sarvaadhaara (the “The fourth expression you used was that He is Basis of All). There are two categories: Aadhaara and Anoraneeyaan, Subtler than the Subtle.” Aadheya. All that exists is seen by the eye or heard by the “Subtle…? Perhaps, you thought that subtle indicates ear, (why, the entire Creation) is Aadheya, the based; they a diminutive microscopic body! No, no. The expression, are all composed of the Five Elements. Well, the Five ‘subtler than the subtle’ means, nirguna, characteristicless, Elements are all Aadheya; for, they are based on the Basis, devoid of qualities, something that you cannot fathom with Brahman. Brahman is the Only Basis. It is not based on the help of the eye and the ear and the rest of the senses. A another entity, for, there is no Second. Therefore, He is thing becomes subtler with the reduction of its Sarvaadhaara, the Basis of All. characteristics. If it has more, it is less subtle. “The sixth too, I shall make clear to you. Achinthya “Sabda (sound), sparsa (touch), roopa (form), rasa roopam, with an Unpicturable Form, a Form that cannot be (taste), gandha (smell)—these are the characteristics of the delineated or imagined. For He is beyond the reach of the five elements: Akasa (space), Vayu (air, wind), Agni (fire), Mind and it is the mind that pictures, delineates or imagines. Jala (water), and Prithivi (earth). Prithivi has all the five. Jala So, His roopam or Form is Achinthya or incapable of being has only four. Agni has three, roopa, sparsa and sabda. imagined by the mind. You might hesitate to accept this. Vayu has just sparsa and sabda. Akasa has only one, sabda. But the mind is matter. It is inert. It is fleeting. But Brahman That is to say, each of these is subtler than the rest and or Paramatma is pure ‘Consciousness.’ It is eternal, Akasa is the subtlest of all. everlasting, imperishable. It and Mind are at opposite poles,
Geetha Vahini 173 174 Geetha Vahini the fleeting and the fixed. They are totally unrelated. One “Arjuna! Just close your eyes for a moment; what is it dies, the other remains! The inert and the active are unrelated. that you experience? Complete Darkness, is it not? How did you know that it is dark? You cannot see darkness. “The question may arise in your mind: what then is the Then how did you announce that there was darkness there? Sadhaka to do? Oh, he is not deprived of hope. Let him There are two entities there—darkness and he who sees the picture the Paramatma as unpicturable, that is enough. Dwell darkness, is it not so? If you are yourself darkness, how on such thoughts as this and the fruit will be vouchsafed can you see the darkness? No, you are the Seer and so you unto you. The Sadhaka must first learn the channels along are not Darkness. Darkness is that which is seen. The Seer which his thoughts should run.” is you. You are the witness. At this, Arjuna pleaded with Krishna thus: “Lord, let “Now, consider another fact: Man very often condemns us proceed. Time is running fast. We cannot be stationary himself as an ignoramus, but if he really were an ignoramus in this battlefield without assuming responsibility or making or a fool, how is he able to recognise his own ignorance? a decision. War is facing us with open jaws, ready to swallow From where did he get that knowledge? When did that Jnana and overwhelm. I am ready to obey the instruction you may enter him? And how? be pleased to give me. Only, let there be no delay.” Hence, “Ajnana is the ‘seen’; Jnana is the ‘seer.’ You are the quickly enlighten me about the seventh attribute of the Drk (seer) which sees the Drsya or Ajnana (ignorance). In Saguna-nirakaara (God with qualities but without form).” the same way, all the eight descriptions above have to be “Yes, the seventh is: Aadhithya-varnam, with the contemplated upon. That is the correct meditation of the Splendour of the Sun as His Complexion. This means, ‘He Form of the Lord.” is self-effulgent as the Sun. He is independent. He is the Arjuna asked, “Krishna! Is such meditation alone Source of the light He shines with.’ He is the effulgence of enough or has it to be supplemented?” the Sun. He makes the Sun shine. So, He is named Aadhithya. I shall tell you about the eighth too, straightaway. “Of course, when this meditation is practised, care ‘Thamasah Parasthaath’—‘Beyond Darkness.’ He is the should be taken to see that the mind is concentrated on that Witness of Darkness or Ajnana. For Para means Witness, thing only. It should not pursue diverse objectives. It must one unaffected. No darkness is as dark as Ajnana; it is so attach itself to that One Supreme, with Love and Devotion, deep and so dangerous. Maya is another word for this Ajnana Prema and Bhakthi. Usually, man’s love gets fastened to and so Thamasah Parasthaath means ‘beyond Maya.’ trifling temporary things and so gets entangled in setbacks
Geetha Vahini 175 176 Geetha Vahini and sorrows. So the love has to be withdrawn from such There is another thing too. You must yourself reason objects and centred on the Lord. out and discover what exactly will expand your heart and what will breed disquiet. Then, hold fast to the former and “I shall tell you briefly what Bhakthi consists of, listen! give up the latter. Or else, straying in devious paths like an Bhakthi is the complete identification of one’s mental insane ape, you will have to twist and turn in confusion. activities with those of the Ideal on which the attachment is What is the cause of all the troubles and discontent to which centred.” many are subjected nowadays? It is the improper use they Here, Arjuna intercepted and asked, “How is that ever make of the senses. possible, O Lord?” “It is possible, Arjuna. Control the Who are the proper people to enter through each door senses, let the mind be effaced as much as possible and let of your home? You must decide and carefully watch. Those the heart be purified, let the vital airs be uplifted into the who must enter by one door should not use some other highest region of the Seersha (Head), let the individual be door. If they do, then, that house will have only discontent, established in the Atmic truth, and let the Pranava be the confusion, disorder. It is wiser to take precautions against only point of attention at the moment of the Prana leaving such disorder before entrance is effected, rather than deal the body. Such a one comes to Me and joins with Me. His with the intruders after they have come in, through the wrong mental activities become the same as Mine,” said Krishna. door. You may excuse the trespass for the first time. But certainly, you must take enough care to see that it is not Here, readers should fix their attention on what the repeated. That is the better method, though not the best. Lord told Arjuna. The Lord spoke of the control of the senses, not their destruction. Control means under one’s Again, Arjuna felt a doubt arising in him. If the senses behest, obedient to the will. Destruction means denial of are bound, how can the Om be pronounced? Krishna activity, full inaction. The Lord also said of all the senses, understood this. He took up the matter Himself. “Arjuna! not of any one or two only. Man must keep all senses under Om has to be pronounced in the mind, not through the his control and use them only when the purposes for which mouth as a sensory organ!” Next, Arjuna raised another they have been devised are to be fulfilled. They should not question to relieve himself of another doubt. “You said, be let loose, just because one has them. Give them the Japathonaasthi paathakam, he who does Japam has no functions they are designed for, but do not allow them to sin. But if Japam cures one from sin, what happens to master you and ruin you. Let them work strictly on regulated Liberation, Moksha? Evidently, Japam is powerless to bring lines. That is the Lord’s intention. that about. Japam will not enable one to concretise the Lord.”
Geetha Vahini 177 178 Geetha Vahini The Lord was happy when Arjuna mentioned this Arjuna made bold to put another query. “Lord it is doubt. “Partha (Arjuna)! Your question is important. But let good that those who repeat the Pranava with their last breath Me tell you, Moksha need not be sought after, separately, attain the Lord. But what about those who do not? Their apart from other objectives. If Om is recited and the number is certainly much larger. Have they no chance of significance of the Om, that is to say, the Lord, is meditated release? In the Court of the Almighty, are only some to be upon, then the Lord is attained by you. In other words, you honoured with seats? Have the miserable and the poor no are liberated.” Arjuna insisted on his point. He asked, “Lord! accommodation at all? Tell me where they go, where they Is it ever possible for Japam to bring about both results? Of will be admitted.” course, it is easy for You to declare so, but trouble starts when we follow the path of Japam and Dhyanam.” “Arjuna! You are falling into a great error, beware. The Lord does not discriminate between the weak and the strong Krishna replied, “It is just for this purpose that I or the high and the low. Such an attitude will never warp His mentioned at the very start about Abhyasa Yoga, the value Vision. All are entitled to His Grace. All are entitled to enter of practice or Abhyasa. Practice, steady practice, will ensure His Durbar (Convocation) Hall. Its doors are ever open. you both results, freedom from sin and Liberation. Probably, No guards are there to bar the entrance of anyone. No one you do not realise the importance of practice. O foolish is prevented. No one is invited. All are welcome to enter. Arjuna, do you not see here how practice makes an animal What can anyone do if some do not approach the door? execute difficult tasks? Look at these horses yoked to the Those who desire warmth have to go near enough to the chariot, these elephants ranged on the field. They render the fireside and sit there. Those who stand afar can know only assistance in battle which even man with the superior the light that emerges from that fireside. What do you say equipment of reason cannot give! Consider how this was of that man who, standing afar, declares that the fire has no made possible. Where have elephants dwelling in the forest warmth? He certainly is not sane. observed the tactics of battle? Or do you hold that fighting on the battlefield is their nature? No, their present skill is “All who yearn for the Presence, all who desire to proof of the value of practice, Abhyasa. enter the Durbar of the Lord and who strive in their mind “Similarly, practise the withdrawal of the mind from constantly for the fruition of that desire, all have admission the senses, steadily. Then it will develop skills which will and accommodation there. It is not everyone that can repeat release you from bondage. Let Me tell you, those who repeat the Pranava at the last moment. That is the reason why with their last breath the sacred Pranava do attain the Lord.” constant remembrance of the Lord is said to have the power Krishna said this with emphasis. of inducing the Lord to bear the burden of your Yogakshema,
Geetha Vahini 179 180 Geetha Vahini happiness here and hereafter. Of course, this too has to be practised long. Sadhana gains everything, sadhana, steady and strong.
Geetha Vahini 182 Geetha Vahini the strength comes from to dedicate yourself as you do now to hollow ideals, the vain fantasies of family, fortune and fame. Can you not direct this strength for that supreme dedication? Man easily offers his all to poisonous objective pleasures. But squirms and protests as if a mountain is tumbling on him when the call is made to dedicate his thoughts, feelings and acts to the Almighty! Salvation in his eyes is as cheap and as easy to attain, as greens in the vegetable market! He seeks to escape from bondage as CHAPTER XVII easily as that. He does not yearn much, but he desires to earn much in the spiritual field! He is sunk more in Thamas than in Thapas. But he wishes for the fruits that Thapas “ alone can offer. Whoever is busy with no other thoughts than those about Me, whoever is ever remembering “Those, who are prompted by genuine desire for the Me, he certainly will release his dying breath fruit, must overcome all obstacles and temptations, doubts through the centre of the head; he will attain Me. I am as and disappointments and dwell on the thought of the Lord. near him, as he is near Me. My dear Arjuna! How can I Then the Lord will not keep apart. He will confer on that forget him, who never forgets Me? Forgetting is a human Sadhaka the status of Sameness, described as Aham frailty, not the characteristic of God, let Me tell you! There Brahmasmi. (‘I am you, You are I, We are one.’) And the is no need for Yoga or Thapas, or even Jnana; whether you Sadhaka will be contemplating this Unity without break. This give these up since you are too weak or whether, in spite of is referred to as Ananyabhaava.” having the strength, you do not feel like struggling to master Arjuna asked, “You say that this Ananya-bhaava, this these, it does not matter. I do not ask for Yoga or Thapas. I Ananya Bhakthi is quite easy and that there is no need to only ask, that your mind be fixed on Me. Devote your mind take any greater trouble. You also declare that for those to Me, dedicate it to Me, that is all I ask for. who have acquired it, You are readily attainable! Well, what exactly is the benefit of attaining you?” “If a Sadhaka cannot do at least this act of dedication to the Lord, I wonder what his sadhana is capable of? If Krishna smiled at this and replied, “Arjuna! What you plead that you have not the strength of mind I ask where greater benefit is there than that? That holy victory makes
Geetha Vahini 183 184 Geetha Vahini mortal man a Mahatma. You may still pose the question: Of declare that those who reach the heaven, Brahma Loka, what benefit is it to become a Mahatma? Listen. The need not be born again? Please make that clear who exactly Mahatma is far superior to the ordinary man. The latter is are those that are freed from this cycle of birth and death?” established in the body and the Jiva; he identifies himself “Arjuna! There are two types of liberation mentioned with the body and with breath, with the particular, ‘the wave.’ in the Upanishads: Sadyo Mukthi (Liberation), and Krama So, he is tossed about by joy and grief; he rises or falls with Mukthi (Ultimate Liberation), Sadyo Mukthi is also referred each experience. Between snatches of calm and storm, he to as Kaivalya Mukthi (Supreme Liberation). For earning reels under many a blow. this, no one need aspire for any heaven. They get this, on “The Mahatma is free from all dual experience. He is the spot, and not by stages, step by step. Liberation secured above and beyond. He has released himself from identity thus is a possession forever. The rest are liable to change. with the particularised. He is the Universal, the Eternal, the When the effect of the merit acquired wears out, heaven Changeless, the Brahma-bhaava, not the Jivabhaava. He has to be given up, and life on earth starts anew. Such souls knows that the Atma is not a limited entity. He feels that it know no merging. Only those who attain Kaivalya (state of extends beyond all limits. He is free from the blemish of retrieval from the bondage of the five elements), merge and Thamas and Rajas. He is neither dull nor driven about by become One with the Eternal, the Universal.” desire. He has pure consciousness, unaffected by attachment “That is to say,” intercepted Arjuna, “the souls that or hate. Many who style themselves as such, nowadays, have attain Kaivalya are destroyed, is it not? Or is there any no purity in their hearts. Their consciousness is soiled by difference between merging and destruction, laya and foulness. But the pure in heart have no further birth and death. naasam?” They are under no obligation to appear again on earth. Without attaining that purity, you cannot escape the round of birth “No, Partha! Layam is not naasam, merging is not and death, however many your meritorious deeds, however destruction. Layam happens when it becomes invisible.” high your spiritual status, however glorious the heaven you “That is what happens when a thing is destroyed. It have secured! Only those who are perpetually in that becomes invisible, we cannot see it any more.” Brahmabhaava can attain this Timeless Me and be freed from the chain, by merging in Me.” “But just because a thing is gone out of sight, how can At this, Arjuna gave expression to another doubt that you pronounce it ‘destroyed’? No. A lump of sugar or salt worried him. He asked, “If that is so, why do the Upanishads placed in water disappears. You can see it no more, but can
Geetha Vahini 185 186 Geetha Vahini you say it has been destroyed? Or, do you say it has merged? “The Karma-atheethas are the Jivan-mukthas. All their It is there, the taste declares it. It has lost the form, but is karmas have been burnt up by the Fire of Jnana. Their present as its characteristic, its Guna. The Jiva also merges impulses for action have been scorched by the Wisdom like this in Brahman. It is not destroyed at all. When the Jiva they have gained. They have no further need for injunctions is not merged like this, it can at best only wander between and prohibitions, (Vidhi and Nishedha). They need no heaven and earth, deserving life in heaven for some time sadhana, like dana, (charity), dharma (virtuous living), thapas and descending again to earth for further efforts towards (austerity). All that they do or feel or think will be Divine, salvation.” holy, virtuous, beneficial to mankind. The very earth they tread on is sacrosanct. Every word they utter will be the Arjuna was still afflicted with doubt. He asked, word of God. Their breath need not take them, on death, to “Krishna, you say that no heaven, even the highest Brahma realms that are heavenly; they merge, on the falling away of Loka, can save man from the cycle of birth and death. Then, the bodily raiment, without delay, in Brahman. Such are the what is the royal road to Salvation? Do you mean to say, Jivis who were described by Me now as having Kaivalya that those who strive for those heavens have to satisfy Mukthi, Brahma-praapthi or Sadyo Mukthi. themselves with just that and no more?” “Next, the second group: the adepts at Nishkama Krishna answered, “Partha! There is a State that knows Karma. These are the Mumukshus (aspirants), alert on the no decline, beyond all these heavens. There are many roads path of liberation, who are intent on attaining it. They perform by which that State can be won. Unaware of these roads or each act as a step in the realisation of the Lord. So they can of the joy of that State, man is taking to others that are never do anything bad. They do not look forward to the either crooked or comfortable. He does not know how to result. They leave it to the Lord to give it, or withhold it. distinguish between the right road and the wrong. They are not prompted by worldly motives or even by the desire to gain heavenly pleasure. Their aim is just this: “I may tell you that there are four roads which are now Liberation from the bondage of the objective world. They used by mankind: (1) Karma-atheetha, beyond karma, win the Grace of the Lord in proportion to the steadiness of unaffected by karma; (2) Nishkama Karma, Karma without their faith and practice. any desire for the fruit thereof, karma unaffected by any craving for the result therefrom; (3) Sakaama Karma, Karma “The third group, which believes in Sakama Karma, with the ambition to reap and enjoy its fruit, and (4) Karma- performs all acts through the desire for the fruit thereof. bhrashta, karma that knows no restraint or control. Since they have an eye on the successful earning of the
Geetha Vahini 187 188 Geetha Vahini fruit, they will engage themselves only in acts that are himself of the hold on this world! Men of this category approved by the Sastras. They will not do any sinful or move round in the wheel of birth and death. To be born and prohibited act. They will equate each act with the merit it to die, one must have auspicious moments which will will confer, the happiness it will ensure, the heaven it will guarantee a wise life and a worthwhile end, Arjuna! Yogis, win. Such men, when they depart from this world will enter for example, give up life only when auspicious moments the Lokas (Supra-mundane worlds) they have sought and are available, not at other times. That is why people say, worked for, and having stayed there as long as their merit ‘Death is the Witness, for the Good.’ An auspicious moment entitles them, they have to return to earth. is to be chosen even for the act of death.” “The fourth group is not guided by any rule of conduct. Arjuna asked, “Krishna! Tell me when the body has to They have no norms, no discrimination between virtue and be yielded to Death, so that one can escape the cycle of vice, right and wrong, proper and improper. They have no birth and death. Tell me also which period of time one should horror of hell, no conception of heaven, no dread of the avoid.” Krishna replied, “Partha! Your question is very timely devil, no reverence for God, no respect for the Sastras, no and urgent. Sometimes, you make Me marvel at your vision of Dharma! They are best pictured as beasts in human intelligence and you make Me very happy. At other times, form. The majority of humans are members of this you make Me laugh at your ignorance. Your egoism and unfortunate group. They strive for momentary pleasure, sense of attachment cause this confusion. Let that pass. Let short-lived happiness, temporary joy and evanescent us come to your question. comfort. To call them apes with human physique will be a “The Yogis who practise Nishkama Karma pass away big mistake. For, the ape only jumps from branch to branch in Tejas (splendour), during day, while there is light, in the or from tree to tree. It releases itself from one branch or bright half of the month, and in the six month period of one tree before landing on another. Men are more like Uttarayana (bright or northward journey). They have as caterpillars, which move from leaf to leaf, fixing their their first state Agni or Fire. Hence, their Path is known as foreparts on a new leaf, before releasing their hindparts from Devayana (six months following the summer equinox, the leaf on which they were resting till then. beginning Hindu Month of Makara, January), or since Agni “That is to say, man by his acts in this life decides on is known also as Archi in the Vedas, Archiraadi (offering) his next birth, where and how it will be, even before leaving Marga. Such Yogis emerge from Prakaasa (Effulgence) this world. The new place is ready for him, his foreparts are and travelling through Prakaasa, they merge in Prakaasa itself. already there. It is only after settling this that he relieves They attain Brahman and are not born again.
Geetha Vahini 189 190 Geetha Vahini “The Yogis who practise Sakama Karma pass away in mind, the symbolic moon-deity presiding over the mind! Dhuma (Smoke) at night, during the dark half of the month, The increasing splendour of the mind due to the increasing during the six months of Dakshinayana. They pass along realisation of one’s own Divinity is what is meant by the Dhumadi (dark or southward journey) Marga and reach word, ‘Suklapaksha.’ Swarga or Heaven and there enjoy the pleasures they have “And what of Uttarayana? Be free from doubt on that yearned for and worked for. When the stock of merit is score, too. Worship offered knowing the meaning of every exhausted, they get born again. rite, sadhana practised knowing the implications of every “Both these categories of men are called Yogis. They step, these cleanse the heart more effectively, and loosen will exist so long as aspirants and active progressive the chains of doubt. individuals exist in the world. “Uttarayana is the period when no dot of cloud or “Here, a doubt may reasonably arise. How is it that whiff of fog contaminates the vast dome and the Sun shines the bright half of the month is auspicious, while the dark in all His Glory. This is the gross meaning. But there is a half is not? What, again, is to happen to those who die, subtle one, too. The heart is the inner sky. There, the Sun when it is neither bright nor dark, neither day nor night? that shines is Buddhi or Intelligence. When the clouds of This is a legitimate doubt and everyone has a right to know ignorance, the fog of egoism and the smoke of attachment the answer. hover in that inner sky, the Sun of Intelligence is hidden and things look murky and are mistaken. Uttarayana of the heart “Now, you must first understand what is meant by is when the inner sky is clear of all these, and when the Sun Sukla Paksha or the Bright Fortnight. It is the half-month shines in full splendour. You must have heard the expression. when the light of the moon increases day by day. But what ‘Jnanabhaskara,’ ‘The Sun of Wisdom.’ The Sun is always is the relationship of the light of the moon with man and his associated with Wisdom and Intelligence. When a person death? The moon is the symbol of the mind of man. passes away with this equipment of the effulgent Sun of ‘Chandramaa manaso jaathah; out of the moon was the Wisdom in his clear heart, he can certainly escape rebirth! manas (mind) born.’ The bright half of the moon, therefore, He takes the path of Agni, the Archiraadi path, as said already, signifies the progress of the mind spiritually, in Divine and merges in Brahman. discipline; the full moon signifies the fullness of that achievement. The bright half is, thus, the period when spiritual “Those who pass away in the other half of the year, progress is attained. For the body, the visible moon; for the the Dakshinayana, have the opposite destiny. Then the heart
Geetha Vahini 191 192 Geetha Vahini is beset with smoke and fog and cloud. The Sun is hidden and His effulgence has no splendour. And in the dark half of the month the moon wanes, symbolising the waning of Godward thoughts. The new moon night is enveloped in complete darkness, all spiritual impulses suffer defeat. The thick smoke of Ajnana lies heavily on the mind. This is the meaning of the expression, Krishna-paksha (dark fortnight). Those who die at such an inauspicious time reap an inauspicious result.”
Geetha Vahini 194 Geetha Vahini those who die in ignorance of their Atmic reality move along the Pithryana, or Dakshinayana or the Dark Path. “Of the Gunas, Sathwa Guna is pure and effulgent; the Thamo Guna is dark and so they are distinguished by the opposite colours of White and Black. Again there are two Nadis, Ida and Pingala by name, subtle nerves, Ida to the left and Pingala to the right of the Sushumna. The Ida- naadi Marga is the Lunar Path and the Pingala-naadi Marga CHAPTER XVIII is the Solar Path. The Yogis proceed along the Solar and the others along the Lunar path. This is another of the unobserved mysteries. “ Since the Uttarayana Marga is lit by the holy “The end of everything that is born is death. Samyoga Splendour of Jnana, it is praised as the Sukla leads to Viyoga; construction must result in the destruction Marga or the White Path. The Dakshinayana of that which is constructed. It is the law of nature that birth Marga is dark, filled with Thamas and Ajnana; so it is called ends in death and death leads to birth. The stage which the Dark Path or the Krishna Marga. Those who discard the knows no coming and going is the stage when the Universal body and move along the White Path and reach the Stage Brahman is visualised, for since Brahman is all-pervasive, of Liberation or Moksha, which is devoid of Delusion, which where is the other place from which the ‘coming’ can be is the Seat and Source of Brahmananda, from which there effected and to which the ‘going’ can be performed? is no return to this world of Name and Form, this is the arena of embodied beings. Those who leave the body during “There is no need to doubt whether such a stage is the Dakshinayana and move along the Dark Path, have to within the reach of all, whether all can achieve this victory. bear again this physical encasement called Deha (body), Nor is any special effort, or peculiar good fortune or a subject to birth and death. specially designed act necessary. It is enough if the mind is always fixed on Paramatma, if the Lord is meditated upon “Uttarayana is not so much a period of time; it is a without break. That will cleanse the mind; the delusion state of mind. Those who discard the body with the glory clogging it will disappear. This by itself comprises Moksha, of Self-knowledge move along the Uttarayana Marga and for what is Moksha but Moha-kshaya, the decline of
Geetha Vahini 195 196 Geetha Vahini Delusion? A person who has achieved this Moha-kshaya earnestness or Sraddha in the act, you cannot gather the will attain Brahmathva, the stage of Brahman, howsoever he fruit. might die. Such a person is called a ‘Jnani.’” “Arjuna! I am the Witness; through Me, this Prakruthi, At this, Arjuna put in a query. He said, “Krishna, I do this conglomeration of the Five Elements called Prapancha, not quite understand the meaning of what you call Jnana. Is all these moveable and immovable objects, are formed. it the knowledge learnt through the ear from the teacher? Or Through Me as the Cause, the Prapancha behaves in various is the knowledge culled from the Sastras? Or is the ways. Fools who cannot understand Me as the Highest knowledge imparted by those rich in actual experience? Principle and as the Master of all the Elements whose Will Which among these, liberates man from bondage?” they have to obey, take Me to be just a man. Some great men reverently meditate on Me as Brahman. Others worship Krishna replied, “The types of knowledge you Me under various Names and in various Forms; some others mentioned now are all useful at some stage or the other of worship Me through Jnana Yajna and Atma Yajna. one’s spiritual development. But by none of them can you escape the cycle of birth and death! That which releases “Whatever the name, whatever the form of worship, I you is known as Anubhava Jnana, the knowledge that you am the Recipient; for I am the Goal of all. I am the only yourself experience; that alone can help you to be free. The One. There is no Other. I Myself become the Worshipped, teacher can be of some help in the process, but he cannot through My many Names and Forms. Not only this, I am show you your real Self. You have to visualise it yourself. the Fruit of all actions, the Bestower of the Fruit, the Basis, Besides, you have to be free from vices like envy. Then the Prompter, the Promoter of all. Why recount and repeat? only can you be called a Purna Jnani, one who has attained I am the Force behind the Birth, Existence and Death of full Jnana. He who has faith in this Jnana, who is devoted in every thing and of every life. I am the Birthless, Deathless acquiring it, and who is full of yearning to earn it, only such Cause. a person can realise Me. “Realise Me, the Primal Cause. That is indeed Moksha. “He must be free from envy. Besides, he must be He is the Jivanmuktha (liberated even while alive) who attains earnest, steeped in Sraddha (steady faith). Earnestness is that Moksha. Therefore, Arjuna, if one yearns to become a essential even for the performance of the smallest act by Jivanmuktha, to attain Moksha, he must accomplish some man. Not man alone, but bird and beast, worm and virus, simple disciplines. That is to say, he has to eradicate fully all have to be earnest to succeed. When you have no the attachment to the body.”
Geetha Vahini 197 198 Geetha Vahini Hearing this, Arjuna intercepted, “Krishna! Do you Me, worships Me, remembers Me, know that I am always speak of this sadhana of complete detachment as a simple with him, ever providing for him in this world and the next; discipline? Is it so easy to practise? Even accomplished I bear the burden of his Yoga Kshema. Do you hear Me?” ascetics find it difficult and you recommend it so glibly to asked Krishna, patting Arjuna again on the back and imparting people like me! You speak of it as if it were a very simple courage to his drooping heart. task. But it is a formidable endeavour. I feel you are putting This statement about the Lord guaranteeing the Yoga me on trial with such suggestions. Can I ever attain that Kshema of the devotee has given rise to a great deal of state? Can I win Liberation, can I attain Moksha? I have no misunderstanding. Even Pundits, not to speak of others, hope,” he said and sat dispirited. have failed to grasp its real import. The commentators on Krishna was watching him steadily losing courage. He the Geetha propagate this Declaration in manifold ways. went close to him and patted his back in a reassuring manner. This most sacred Sentence is as the navel to the He said, “Arjuna, there is no need to get startled and desperate Geetha-body. The navel of Vishnu was the place where just for this. No, no one will get faith as soon as one hears Brahma took birth. This sloka is the navel or place of nativity of it. One must delve into it with the help of reason; then it for those who thirst for Brahma Jnana. If this Sloka is will be found that this discipline is not as hard as it is imagined followed in practice, the entire Geetha can be understood. to be. To become completely detached it is not necessary to grow matted hair, wear ochre robes and torture the body There are a number of interesting stories current about into skin and bone. It is enough if you do all acts as dedicated this Sloka. I shall give one example: A learned Pundit was to the Lord, without any desire. This is the secret of once giving discourses on the Geetha in the august presence Liberation. of a Maharaja. One day, the turn of this Sloka came: “Performing all activities in this manner is not difficult. Ananyaaschinthayantho maam Only, one should have steady faith and earnestness. Of Ye janaah paryupaasathe course, these are essential for every type of activity. So, Theshaam nithyaabhiyukthaanaam you can realise that they are indispensable for spiritual Yogakshemam vahaamyaham. activity too. The Pundit was explaining enthusiastically the many- “Whoever among devotees dedicates all acts to Me sided implications of this Sloka, but the Maharaja shook his with no other thought, whoever meditates on Me, serves head and said: “This meaning is not correct.” He continued
Geetha Vahini 199 200 Geetha Vahini to dispute the correctness of every one of the explanations the Maharaja approve it? The fault is yours.” At this, the the Pundit gave. The poor Pundit had won meritorious Pundit rose in anger from the cot, like a cobra whose tail is distinctions at the court of many a Maharaja and was trodden hard. “What do you know, you silly woman? Am I honoured by them all with pompous titles. He felt as if he inferior in intelligence to you? Do you, who are engaged in was stabbed, when the Maharaja in the presence of the entire the kitchen all the time, cooking and serving, claim to know more than I? Shut your mouth and quit my presence,” he band of courtiers condemned his explanation of the Sloka roared. as “wrong.” He smarted under the insult. But plucking up courage, he again set upon his task; and collecting all his But the lady stood her ground; she replied, “Lord! scholarship, he plunged into an eloquent discourse on the Why do you fly into such a rage at a statement of mere multiple meaning of the words, “Yoga” and “Kshema.” The truth? Repeat the sloka once again to yourself and ponder Maharaja did not approve of even this; he ordered: “Find over its meaning. You will then arrive at the right answer out the meaning of this Sloka and having understood it well, yourself.” Thus by her soft words the wife brought calm come to me again tomorrow.” With this, the Maharaja rose into the mind of her husband. from his throne and went into the inner apartments. The Pundit started analysing the meaning of each individual word in the Sloka. Ananyaas-chinthayantho maam, The Pundit lost even the few grains of courage left in he began, deliberately and slowly, repeating aloud the various him. He was weighed down by anxiety. He tottered under meanings. The wife intervened and said, “What benefit is it the insult. He reached home and, placing the copy of the to learn and expound the meanings of words? Tell me what Geetha aside, he fell on the cot. your intention was, when you approached this Maharaja. Surprised at this, the Pundit’s wife said, “Tell me why What was the purpose?” At this, the Pundit got wild. “Should you came home from the Palace today in such grief? What I not run this family, this home? How am I to meet the cost exactly did happen?” She rained one anxious question after of food and drink, of clothes and things, for you and all the another, so that the Pundit was obliged to describe to her all rest? It is for the sake of these that I went to him, of course, or else, what business have I with him?” he shouted. that had happened, the insults heaped on his head, the command with which the Maharaja sent him home, etc. The The wife then replied, “If you had only understood wife listened calmly to the account of what had happened what Lord Krishna has declared in this Sloka, the urge to and after pondering deeply over the incident, she said, “Yes, go to this Maharaja would not have arisen! If He is it is true. What the Maharaja said is right. The explanation worshipped without any other thought, if one surrenders to you gave for that Sloka is not the correct one. How could Him, if at all times the mind is fixed on him, then the Lord
Geetha Vahini 201 202 Geetha Vahini has declared in this Sloka that He would provide everything Even today, many learned men who go about for the devotee. You have not done these three. You discoursing on the Geetha and doing propaganda for it, do approached the Maharaja, believing that he would provide not observe its principles in practice. They are engaged in everything! That is where you have gone against the meaning simply expounding to the world the valueless rind, the textual of this verse. That is the reason why he did not accept your meaning, the sense of the words and nothing more. Trying explanation.” to spread the Geetha, without actually practising it, is tantamount to ruining the cause and insulting the sacred Hearing this, that reputed scholar sat awhile, ruminating book. They extol the Geetha as the very breath of their life, on her remarks. He realised his fault. He did not proceed to as the Crown of all scriptures, and as having emanated from the Palace the next day. Instead, he got immersed in the the Lips of the Lord Himself. worship of Krishna at home. When the king inquired why the Pundit had not appeared, courtiers said that he was staying They show so much reverence for the Book that their at home and had not started out. The king sent a messenger, eyes overflow with tears at the very mention of its Name. but the Pundit declined to move out. He said, “There is no They place it on their heads. They press it on their eyes. need for me to go to anyone; my Krishna will provide me They keep it in their shrines and offer Puja to it with great with everything; He will bear My Yoga Kshema Himself. I bursts of demonstrative devotion. All the respect, all the suffered insult because I did not realise this so long, being worship is only for the paper, the book! blinded by eagerness to know the manifold meanings of mere words. Surrendering to Him, if I am ceaselessly If indeed they have reverence for the Words of the engaged in worshipping Him, He will Himself provide me Lord, the contents of the book, they would have striven to with all I need.” put them into practice, is it not? No, they do not strive, they have no iota of experience. If they have the experience, When the messenger took this message to the Palace, none of them would barter the spread of that experience for the Maharaja proceeded to the dwelling of the Pundit, on money. They would yearn only for Grace. foot. He fell at the feet of the Pundit, saying, “I thank you sincerely for explaining to me this day, out of your own Not even one in a million among the Geethapracharaks experience, the meaning of the Sloka which you expounded today, among those who talk about their mission of spreading yesterday.” Thus, the King taught the Pundit that any the Geetha, has the yearning for the Grace of the Lord. No, propagation of spiritual matters which does not come out if they have that yearning, they would not have thought of of the crucible of experience is mere glitter and show. income or of money.
Geetha Vahini 204 Geetha Vahini fame. But the times have gone so awry, that they are today, misused for acquiring publicity and praise! Those who listen to the expositions of these Pracharaks are also neglecting to question the bona fides. They do not care to examine whether the persons who extol the Geetha to the skies have tasted the sweetness of its teachings. Words and deeds are far apart. They exhort others but those who are exhorted find that the teachers do not themselves follow the lesson! No, not even one in a million. CHAPTER XIX There are some who boast that they have the entire Geetha on the tip of the tongue, that they can roll out, on S the spot, any sloka from the Geetha which you want to peakers who are out to spread the Geetha have hear, if only the chapter and number are given. Or, they can multiplied nowadays and as a consequence, a quote chapter and number for any phrase or word you give. variety of interpretations, most of them far I am inclined to laugh when such scholarship is exhibited. removed from the genuine one, have emanated, clouding Poor tongue, that it should carry so much on its tip, without the true significance. Interpretations follow the nature and any of it being absorbed in actual life! A gramophone record character of the exponent. Once an opinion is formed, he can repeat as well as they, and with equal benefit to itself. tries to buttress it with appropriate arguments and prove all Practising one verse certainly yields more benefit than learning others wrong. It is then repeated parrot-like on every all the verses by rote and retaining them in memory. Arjuna occasion. No attempt is made to practise the Geetha and proved every word of Krishna true, by practising it. His make it part of one’s actual life. Such persons pretend to be sincerity won him the Grace of Krishna. great Geetha Pracharaks (Exponents or speakers of Geetha) and go about, heavy with the burden of credentials and It is a pity that even extremely learned Pundits at the titles. They ruin themselves by this deception and undermine present time are unaware of the thrill of putting into practice the trust placed on the Geetha. a single word of the Geetha. What then are we to say of the unlearned, the ignorant? In short, even some very reputed The words of God are, each one, for translation into exponents of the Geetha are playing false to its teaching, actual life; not for scattering into the ears of men to reap acting contrary to the message. To the Song of the Lord,
Geetha Vahini 205 206 Geetha Vahini each one adds a fancy note of his own to demonstrate his Mahabharatha, etc., bow their heads, press them to their special twist in scholarship, or his favourite predilection. eyes, place them on their heads, keep them on a special seat Let us consider one example of this type: The 10th verse of in the shrine and reverentially placing a few flowers on them, the 6th chapter of the Geetha declares that “Parigraha” they sit with closed eyes and, with teardrops rolling down (accepting help from others) is a great sin. their cheeks, fall prostrate before the books and rise very much satisfied with themselves! All that reverence is for the Now those who accept the Geetha as authority should stack of paper, really, not for the contents of the books, the act accordingly, avoiding Parigraha, isn’t it so? Parigraha subjects they deal with. means “accepting” even for the upkeep of the body and the maintenance of Dharma! These Pracharaks however, do What the head must carry is not the weight of the paper, accept, 99% of them! The condemnation of Parigraha applies but the message explained thereon. Attach value not to the to all forms. There are no modifying circumstances or book, but to the subject. Revere, not the volume, but the exceptions. Yet, collections and contributions are asked for matter expounded therein. Install it not on the altar, but in Geethayajnas (Geetha expositions for sharing knowledge), the heart. For it is only then that the authority of the Geetha as “offering” during Harathi, as expenses for the Geetha will be honoured steadily, at all times. The mind will not be Pracharaka Sanghas (community), as Nazar or Kanuka cleansed of egoism or like evils by all this outward reverence: (remuneration) for the Guru. Lectures are “sold” for tickets, learning by rote, offering worship in the shrine room, holding as entertainment (like the drama and cinema) is sold. People on the head, pressing on the eyes, etc. Let the message who do this have no faith in the words of Krishna; for, had enter the heart. Put it into practice and taste the joy that they the faith, they would not have behaved in such contrary comes therefrom. That is the way of honouring the Geetha. ways. If they were convinced that it is wrong, they would not be tempted to act so. They explain the sloka and feel The tastiest dish can never quell your hunger if you that their duty is done. They do not feel the need to follow place it on the head or press it to your eye or fall prostrate the advice. That is the spirit of the times, for this is the age before it. The Geetha too is on a par with this. The Geetha of hypocrisy. People who watch this type of Geetha Prachar is a tasty dish, full of the sweet ingredients of Bhakthi lose faith first in the Pracharak and later, in the Geetha itself. (devotion), Jnana (wisdom), Karma (activity) and Vairagya The publicity dissolves into mere pomp and vanity. (detachment). Eat it. Drink it. One mouthful is enough. The The teachings of the Geetha do not get the respect hungry man does not need all the grain that is harvested. A that the book gets. Thousands of people, when they see the handful of rice suffices. The thirsty man need not drink the sacred books, Geetha, Ramayana, Bhagavatha, Godavari dry. A glass of water is enough.
Geetha Vahini 207 208 Geetha Vahini He who has hunger for God need not consume the here to march forward and save themselves. They are not entire Geetha; it can be quenched by practising even one slaves to outward polish, external embroidery, or material sloka. A box of matches has many sticks. If you want to comfort. They search for the basic Atma with the inner eye light a fire, you need strike only one; you can nurture the and cultivate detachment. The people of Bharath, who have little flame into a huge fire, with care and diligence. The this grand nature, are however, attracted today by material entire stock of sticks need not be struck. There are 700 progress and outward pomp! This is a tragedy much to be sticks in the Geetha. Each one is a stick from which you regretted. can light the flame of Jnana. Strike one on the stone of Those who go about expounding the Geetha with the experience, that is enough. object of earning money are thereby keeping God afar. They The Geetha has to be used thus for Self-realisation. may give various justifications for their behaviour, no doubt. That is the holy task for which it is designed. It is a great But no one who has real faith in the Geetha or who is a real wrong to misuse it. All attempts to use it for fame and fortune, adherent of its teaching can accept their explanations. for titles and display, are but symptoms of egoism, They The Geetha is spoken in order to foster Dharma, not are acts of sacrilege. The ‘gandha’ (fragrance) must be Dhanam (riches). It serves to promote goodness, not extracted from this ‘grantha’ (essence); that is the test of “goodsness.” Collecting money in the name of a temple for scholarship. The fragrance (gandha) is the essence of the Krishna or for Rama, or a Mandir for the Geetha is another book (grantha). Do not, on the other hand, transform the means of reducing faith in God. Building a house for the masthaka into a pusthaka, the brain into a book. Lord who is immanent and all-pervading is absurd. The See God in the stone. Do not change God into stone. heart is the proper temple where Krishna or the Geetha is to That is the vision which is highly desirable. The stone must be installed. To put up an artificial structure that is certain to be visualised as Divine, suffused with God which it really be ravaged by time, for the eternal Absolute, the is. This vision is the precious gift that God has given the indestructible Godhead is very improper. Of course, until a people of this land. Pearls do not float on the waves of the stage is reached, these may be necessary, but in that case, it ocean. Dive deep into the silent caverns at the bottom if is wiser to make the best use of the ancient temples that you yearn for them. The people of this land have sought for already exist. Building new ones and ruining the old ones is God in this manner for ages. as foolish as killing the cow and donating footwear made The practice of Dharma is the body. The realisation of out of its hide! The welfare of the world can be promoted God is its heart. This is the truth that has urged the people by the renovation of old temples, and not by the creation of
Geetha Vahini 209 210 Geetha Vahini new ones. The installation of God in ancient days was done experienced the joy of sadhana (spiritual practice) and according to strict Sastric ritual and so they are holier. The success in and through it has become very necessary. power radiated from them confers upon this land whatever Everyone from the simple unlettered man to the little welfare it enjoys now. Paramahamsa (realised sage) must recognise this need. All must cultivate faith in the Geetha and take it as the authentic The Rishis of the past suffered hardships, detached word of the Lord. themselves from the world and even disintegrated their physiques in the search for the secrets of individual salvation The Lord has given the assurance: “Yoga kshemam and social uplift. They have handed down certain codes of vahaamyaham,” “I shall bear the burden of your welfare, here and hereafter”; He has undertaken this task voluntarily. conduct and rules of living which are practicable and simple. But for mortals and aspirants to benefit from this, they have Even these are now neglected or misunderstood. New codes to live as ordained. They have to adhere to the lines laid and rules are imposed so that these precious ones have down. When they feel that they are not so helped, they have gone under. only to examine their own lives and discover how far they When elders, Gurus and Pundits, accept and honour have kept up the commands of God regarding the regulation these newfangled modes of behaviour, how can Bharath of life. They fail to examine this. They do not consider the continue to be Dharma Kshetra (The field of righteousness), past and future. They complain only about the grief of the Yoga Kshetra (The field of self-control) and Thyaga Kshetra moment, not knowing that it is caused by neglect in the past (The field of sacrifice)? This downfall in ideals explains and ignorance of the future. This is the root of their suffering. why the land which verily was Annapurna (Goddess of While considering this assurance, the condition nature), feeding all her children has to wail today for food. precedent contained in the same sloka, The holy experience—Shivoham, I am Shiva—was “Ananyaaschinthayantho maam, ye janaah resounding from every mountain valley, every cave, every paryupaasathe” (Remember me without any other thought) temple and each sacred river bank. But now the cry is has to be remembered. “Yogakshemam vahaam-yahhm” Savoham, Savoham, I am dead! (Your worldly and spiritual welfare is My responsibility) is The land has lost its ancient joy; it is infested with the crown of this condition, the final fruit. The assurance is anxiety. It is the home of self-aggrandisement. It is pursuing the head, but no head can function independently of limbs. empty pomp. To counteract these tendencies, the spread Holding fast to the head only, apart from neck and shoulders of spiritual knowledge by persons who have actually and the rest of the body, is like putting faith in the key in
Geetha Vahini 211 212 Geetha Vahini one’s hand after the iron safe has been stolen! Of what use sees only the Lord. He works and spends his leisure with is the key, after the treasure is burgled? the Lord. The conditions for the fulfilment of that assurance are: Such persons have no need to perform Yajna or Yaga. Ananyachintha and Upaasana, Meditation on the Lord They need not busy themselves with meritorious acts of unhampered by any other thought and steady worship. If charity. They need not go from one holy place to another. unbroken meditation is absent, when worship is not offered Why should they be sad if they miss these things and with unconditional surrender, what justification is there to complain that the Lord did not give them the chance or the complain that He is not bearing the burden? wherewithal for these? He does not insist on these or crave for these. Offer whatever arises in the mind, made pure by You surrender to others. You praise and extol others. sadhana; He gladly accepts all. You may engage yourselves You are immersed in other thoughts. How then can He in what are termed “good deeds,” but if the mind is unclean, assume the burden? You serve others. You press the Lord if the vessel is not “tinned” with the thought of God, they for reward! How can this be Ananya Chintha, undivided are all polluted into poison. He is particular that the vessel loyalty? If a man is the servant of the King, he must serve should be clean. him wholeheartedly. If he serves the King and loves his family, it cannot be termed unswerving loyalty. Serve whom Note how the handful of parched rice that Kuchela you love, love whom you serve. That is the secret of offered the Lord with a pure mind pleased Him. Read the Saranagathi, surrender. Vyasa (Sage who compiled the experiences of Vidura and Droupadi in the epics and Geetha, Vedas and Puranas) made a lovely garland using Puranas. What did they offer the Lord? Vidura gave a cup the words of Krishna as flowers; of that garland, this sloka of gruel. Droupadi had only a wee bit of leaf to offer. On is the crest. It is the central jewel of that garland of gems. the face of it, they are valueless, unable to fetch even half a The words “Yoga” and “Kshema” used by the Lord paisa as price. But consider how much the Lord gave in here mean: “Yoga” acquisition of something desirable; and return! He does not calculate the value of things. He “Kshema,” the preservation of what is thus acquired. The calculates the feeling that prompted the act. So, purify the discipline by which you can preserve it is: Ananya chintha, feeling in order to win His Grace. exclusive meditation on the Lord. That will cleanse the mind. It will make you a Bhaktha. The Bhaktha is recognised by these things. He talks of the Lord. He sings of the Lord. He
Geetha Vahini 214 Geetha Vahini that some are happy and others are unhappy, some are strong in body and mind, some are weak and sickly, some are poor and some rich? What is the reason behind all this? When you yourself are above any distinctions of such type, why can you not keep all in the same condition? Observing facts as they are, it is difficult to believe that you look upon all without any partiality.” Krishna laughed at this ‘doubt’ which worried Arjuna! “I give expression only to truth. I do not adjust My speech CHAPTER XX to your approval or disapproval. I am not elated when you approve, or depressed when you disapprove. I am the same T in all. But all are not the same in Me. You have observed he Geetha clearly declares that only the that during the cold months villagers sit around a fire at Hrudaya-pushpa, (Heart-Lotus), free from night. But only those who sit near the fire get refreshed by impurities, that grows in the Manasa-sarovar, the warmth. Those squatting far away have also to put up the pellucid waters of the Mind, is worthy to be offered to with the darkness. If people stay afar and complain that God. That is the reason why Krishna told Arjuna, “My dear they do not receive the warmth and that they have to suffer brother-in-law, whatever activity you are engaged in, darkness, can you ascribe it to the partiality of fire? It is whatever gift you give, whatever food you take, do it as a meaningless to argue from this, that fire treats different people dedicated offering to Me. Do everything in the dedicatory differently. spirit as a tribute to God, for only such acts reach Me. I have no special preference for any one Name. All Names “The splendour of Divine Vision is akin to this. If you are Mine. I know neither friend nor foe. I am the unaffected seek to earn it, you have to approach it and stay there. Witness. I reside with all who serve Me and derive joy from Everyone has equal right to do so and to feed the fire, so that service.” that it might illumine and warm even more. Fire is impartial; in deriving its benefit and in making it grow into greater and This raised some doubts in Arjuna’s mind. He asked, greater capacity, there are differences. I am Splendour, I “Krishna! You say that you do not make any distinction, have no partiality at all. To experience Me and derive Bliss that you have neither friend nor foe. How then does it happen from Me, all have equal chance, opportunity and authority.
Geetha Vahini 215 216 Geetha Vahini Distinctions and differences arise as a result of the faults of examples of the Lord’s Prema (love), His uniform kindness the Sadhakas. They are not blemishes in Me.” to all. “Manmanaa bhava, madbhakatho, mad yaajee, Did you notice the loving words of Krishna, the shower maam namaskuru,” this command of the Lord means just of His Grace? How true are His words! Really, people do this. Keep your mind steadily on Me, be devoted sincerely not understand the faults in themselves. They seek faults in to Me, prostrate before Me offering all your thoughts, words others. If the Lord has faults, how can the world exist or and deeds to Me, Love Me steadfastly, He has commanded. survive? The Lord sees all as equal. His Heart embraces all He has thus indicated that what He most desires in you are in Love. That is the reason why the world has at least this a ‘pure mind’ and ‘untarnished Love.’ much of peace and prosperity. The doctor may declare that the patient has no fever just to console the sick man. But Immersed in Manava thathwa (Humanness), you cannot the thermometer cannot lie. God knows and reacts to the attain Madhava thathwa (Madhavaness). You have to attain inner feeling, not to the outer appearance. He can never go Madhava thathwa to get Madhava-hood. To see darkness, wrong, nor can He be deceived. The world considers only you must have darkness only; to see light, you should have the outward appearance. It is guided by that alone. Wade in light. To understand Intelligence you have to be intelligent. the river. Then only can you know the depth of the water. If you are constantly active about human things, how can Eat, if you must know the taste. When people pronounce you realise the Glory of Divinity? To become Divine, you judgements on the depth or the taste, without wading or have to dwell in the memory of the Divine, act Divinely, tasting, how can their declarations be taken as true? If the behave Divinely. The state, the environment and the feeling, Lord Himself was affected by partiality, how could He award all must be co-ordinated for that one purpose. Then only the Bliss of Sayujya (Unity in God) to the cowherd maids can the principle be grasped. of Brindavan? Would He have partaken of fruits partly eaten by Sabari? Could Janaka have become a Brahmajnani? Could It is on the basis of this truth that Krishna continued Nandanar have achieved the Grand Vision of the Lord? Could thus: “Arjuna! Jnanis are superior even to the gods who are Prahlada and Vibhishana have approached the Lord? Would in their turn superior to men. But these Jnanis too are unable Hanuman have been accepted as the messenger of Rama? to grasp the full import of God. How then can ordinary Could Valmiki have written the great epic, Ramayana? Do men like you ever understand it?” At this sly dig, Arjuna these indicate any partiality in the composition of the Lord? bent his head in shame. He said, “Yes, I agree Krishna, You Or do they prove that He has no such trait? These are are beyond the grasp of anyone, however intelligent he may
Geetha Vahini 217 218 Geetha Vahini be. You are of endless manifoldness. I am convinced. You “The Five Elements, Earth, Water, Fire, Wind and Sky are the Universal Absolute, I know. are also My Forms. I am the activity in the Sun, Moon and Stars. When the Great Destruction comes, I am the Force “I believe that you have created the entire Universe of Destruction and I am the Force which constructs again. I and that you are fostering it and presiding over both the am everything from the microscopic to the macroscopic. I evolution and involution of the worlds, that you are the am the Past, the Present and the Future. I am the three Master of Srishti (creation), Sthithi (sustenance) and Laya Regions and the three Gunas which have shaped man and (dissolution). You have told Me this yourself. I am ever nature. There is no object which is not I, no name which is grateful for this and I am happy that I was considered worthy. not Mine. Blood taken from any part of the body is the same as from any other part. So too, the Divine is everywhere “But how, in what forms, are You immanent in the the same.” Universe You have brought into being? I long to hear it from You and make myself worthier to be alive,” said Arjuna. Then, Arjuna joined both his palms and with uplifted “And, which among these various forms am I to meditate hands, he asked, “Krishna! The whole of Creation is your upon? Tell me, so that I can meditate likewise and save Form, is it not? Knowledge, Wealth, Power, Strength, myself,” he pleaded. Energy, Splendour, all these are expressions of Your Glory, “A pretty small question, that!” said Krishna, with a are they not? Well, will You not give me the sacred chance smile. “Perhaps, you felt that you can easily understand the to fulfil my life’s desire to experience You as all this Creation, answer if given! Right. Since the question has been put, I as Viswaroopa, of the Form of Creation Itself? I plead with shall melt a little and give the answer. Listen carefully, I am you, I pray at Your Feet.” the Inner Atma in the Lotus Heart of each and every Being. So, if you believe and direct your life on the basis of the Knowing the anguish of his heart, Krishna replied, belief that the Inner Atma in every being is My Paramatma, “Arjuna! I shall certainly satisfy you. But your physical eyes that is enough Dhyana for you. See that this belief is not cannot see that Glory. The Viswaroopa cannot be perceived shaken or overthrown; stick to it steadily, practise that belief, by the limited vision which sees and grasps only this Nature. apply it in your deeds, words and thoughts. Then the Therefore, I shall confer on you the supernatural eye. Now, experience of Oneness, of your being Me and I being you, see!” He said and manifested Himself before him as Creation can be achieved. and more. What great Mercy? What superb experience!
Geetha Vahini 219 220 Geetha Vahini While at this point, there is one subtle detail which I wish I could know the meaning and purport of this seekers have to note. The Vedas, Sastras and Puranas, formidable Form,” Arjuna exclaimed. besides many scholars and saints and others who have a “Did you see, Arjuna? Have you known by this that I right to speak about such matters, all describe God as Sarva- am the Creator, Sustainer and Destroyer of all Activity and vyapi and Sarva-bhoothaantharaatma, that is, as present of all Beings and Objects? Have you realised that you cannot everywhere and as the Inner Reality in every being. On the save anyone on this battlefield, nor can you kill anyone? basis of this, some people argue, “If he is so present You have no power to kill nor have they the power to die, everywhere and in everything, why is He not seen by by their own efforts. Living and dying are both directed by everyone?” For all such, the reply is: how can the physical My Will. I bear the burden of the Earth. I create the burden. eye composed of the Five Elements see beyond the five? I relieve it,” said Krishna, fondly patting Arjuna on the back and speaking softly to assuage his ecstatic excitement. Nothing can illumine an object that does not reflect light. But a flame illumines itself and sheds light all around. This incident is a fine example to illustrate how God is God is self-luminous. He illumines all, He is beyond Nature, bound by sincerity of devotion and how He bends to console which is but a manifestation of His Glory. So, He can be and encourage His devotees. Just imagine! How could this seen only by the Eye of Wisdom, an eye that can be won Arjuna, who was so hesitating and nervous until he got ocular only by His Grace. Hence, worship of God is an essential demonstration like an ordinary mortal, face and conquer part of sadhana. He who fails in seeing himself can never mighty heroes and masters of all arts like Bhishma, Drona succeed in seeing others, in seeing anything outside him. and Karna? They were conquered by His Will. Engage yourself in sadhana that will secure the Grace of God; through that Grace, the Jnana Nethra, the Eye of Arjuna wiped the tears from his eyes. He folded his Wisdom will be granted. He is easily reachable by the path hands in prayer. “Oh Lord, I see the Viswaroopa which I of Devotion. While experiencing the Vision of God in the had never before seen or heard about, or even conceived. I Universe, and God as the Universe, Arjuna was shedding realise that it is a Factual Truth. Those terrific flames of tears of joy. “Oh, Almighty God! All the gods, Brahma the splendour are scorching me, my body is sizzling under the Creator, all the sages and saints, all the manifold beings and impact of that Glory. Present Yourself before me, once again, objects, moveable and immovable: Oh, I see every one of with the sweet smiling Form of Yours. I can no longer bear these. I see all…Oh, from Your terror-creating Face, Flames this Vision. Father! Resume Your Form, I cannot continue of Splendour emerge and spread to farthest distances. How to look upon this,” pleaded Arjuna.
Geetha Vahini 221 222 Geetha Vahini His Grace made Him agree. He said, “Arjuna! You form obstacles to success?” Krishna chided Arjuna and have just seen this Universeful Form of Mine, a Vision which replied, “I am surprised that you should ask such questions no height of Vedic scholarship or ritual asceticism or austerity after going through all this experience. Do you not realise can ever hope to win. This is achieved only by the Bhaktha that for those who have fixed their minds on God, who who is devoted to Me, with Ananya Bhakthi; devotion which have reposed in Me, the Personification of Truth, eternal does not admit of the least distraction. Such Bhakthas see and pure, there will not be an iota of ‘identification of the only the Lord. Whatever they do, they do as worship to the self with the body,’ (Deha-bhranthi). If they have still the Lord. They have no other form before their eyes, no other awareness of sex or caste or stage of life with all the attendant thought in their minds, no other act for their hands. At all pride, humility, etc., it only reveals they have not surrendered times and places, they see only My Form, they utter only their minds to God. For those who have rid themselves of My name. They think only about Me. They feel only for Me attachment to the body, there will not be the distraction of or about Me. They are active only for My sake. It is such, caste, status, etc. O Arjuna that attain this Vision. I too ask for only this: “But the Ashrama dharma and the Varna dharma (the Ananya Bhakthi.” codes of moral conduct prescribed for the castes and for Arjuna asked with a smile and a little tremor of the lips, those in the Four Stages of Life—(student, householder, “Lord! I realise that You are pleased with undeviating single- recluse and monk) do not hinder in any way the discipline pointed devotion. But are you pleased with the worship of of fixing the mind on God or of purifying the mind of evil You-with-form or You-without-form? Do you prefer or worshipping the Lord through all one’s actions, words Saakaara Upaasana or Niraakaara Upaasana? Which melts and thoughts. The distinctions of sex or caste or status or You more and contributes to success in getting Your stage of life affect only those who live in the awareness of Blessings? Which is easier for the Sadhaka and more the body as Reality and who act as if the world is absolute welcomed by You? Please tell me.” and eternal. Krishna was happy that this question was asked. He At this, Arjuna said, “Krishna! The contemplation of said, “Arjuna! I do not make any distinction between the the Formless, Characteristic-less, Nirguna-niraakaara is two. I am pleased, however I am worshipped, provided the very difficult, is it not, for those with Deha Bhranthi or mind is saturated with Me and there is steady Faith in every Identification of the Self with the body? The worship of the act, word and thought.” Arjuna intercepted with the query, Formful aspect of God which is within the reach of the “Krishna! Are mere purity of heart and steady Faith enough? ordinary man, can this yield purity of mind, purity of the Do not sex or status as fixed by caste or the stage of life inner Instruments of Consciousness? Please enlighten me.”
Geetha Vahini 224 Geetha Vahini will remain forever without being spoilt. The individual has no more birth and consequent death. That is to say, he will be liberated. Becoming like that dry nut inside the shell is the stage called Jivanmuktha, of Liberation while alive. “The contemplation of the Godhead as ‘above and beyond all attributes’ is necessary for the attainment of Jivanmukthi. If that is difficult, and beyond your capacity, you can do another thing. Dedicate all worship, all adoration, CHAPTER XXI all Vedic rituals and other vows and vigils with all the fruits that may accrue, to Me. Take Me as the Ultimate Goal, as the Final Aim which transforms all acts into worship. Fix “ Arjuna! People think that the worship of God with your mind on Me, meditate on Me. I shall then shower My Form and Attributes is quite enough. This Grace and take you across the Ocean of Change, of discipline will only be of some help. It will guide Samsara. I shall favour you with the Goal you seek. Arjuna! the person along the road only for a little while. For the It is not an easy task to fix your mind steadily on Me. Not Lord will not condescend to grant Liberation for just this! everyone can succeed in this. However long the practice, it For, he who aims at Liberation must first give up attachment is hard to keep the mind on Me, without deflecting it towards to the body. Without that, the Atmic stage cannot be attained. other things or ideas. The identification with the body is the expression of “You might therefore ask, ‘Have we no other means?’ ignorance. The Atma must be recognised as distinct from My reply is, ‘Yes, there is.’ Even those who are eager to the Prakruthi (nature). engage themselves in acts that please Me can get established “The craving for objective pleasure which is based on in the Atmic Consciousness and gain liberation. By means the unreal value attached to Prakruthi has to be removed by of prayer, recitation of the Name, adoration of the glory, Dhyanam and Thapas. When that craving is lost, the worship, etc., the sins of the past can be destroyed, the individual becomes like the dry nut, inside the coconut shell, inner consciousness purified of impulses and urges. Then which becomes loose and unattached both to the shell and the light of wisdom will dawn, leading to liberation from the fibre outside it. It does not germinate or sprout again. It darkness.”
Geetha Vahini 225 226 Geetha Vahini There is great need for readers to ponder over this be in accordance with His Will. The devotee must test every point, for it is through the weighing of pros and cons that thought and feeling on the touchstone of the Lord’s declared valuable conclusions are reached. Consider for example the preferences. difference between Bhakthi, as described in popular usage The Geetha declares that though a person may have and Bhakthi as declared by the Lord. Popularly, Bhakthi is deep devotion to the Lord, he cannot be called a Bhaktha if described as genuine devotion to the Lord. But it connotes he lives without regard to the commands of the Lord; that much more than this. is, the Dharma laid down in the Sastras, which embody His orders, revealed to saints and seers. It is in this sense that Devotion to the Lord is only a form of discipline to Krishna uses the word, Bhakthimaan, when He declares in reach the Goal. The seeker should not stop with the the Geetha, “Bhakthimaan yah sa me priyah. (The devotee acquisition of devotion. He should pay attention not so much is very dear to Me.)” to the devotion or love that he has towards the Lord, but to Again, whatever act a Bhaktha does, he should not the Love and Grace that the Lord bestows on him! He must feel that it is, “mama karma” or “My karma.” Krishna says be always eager to find out which behaviour of his, what that it must be conceived as “Karma for the Lord, by the acts of his, will be most pleasing to the Lord, will fill the Lord,” “Easwareeya Karma.” Usually people feel that some Lord with Anandam. Inquire about that, yearn for that, carry acts are “theirs” and others are “the Lord’s.” This is not the out the things that will secure that objective—be engaged in mark of the true Bhaktha. If all acts are felt as the Lord’s, acts conducive to gain it. That is real Bhakthi. they will not be tarnished by egoism or the taint of “mine.” But people generally do not follow this ideal of Bhakthi, Bhakthi is to be identified as the discipline which nor do they think about the implications of that ideal. They removes egoism and the limitations of “I” and “mine.” That pay attention only to the love that the devotee has to the is the reason why the Bhaktha is defined by those who know, Lord; and, in the process, they do not pay much attention as one who is Avibhaktha with God, “non separate” from to the Dharma and the Karma which the Lord approves or God. At all times and under all conditions, one’s acts and appreciates! This is why Krishna says, “Karma which feelings must be God-centred. Instead, if you pray when pleases the Lord is superior to the karma which fulfils the overwhelmed by misery, worry and loss, “O God! Save yearnings of the devotee.” Whatever the devotee does or me, rescue me from these,” and when they pass, if once thinks or plans or observes, he should draw down the Grace again you plunge into objective affairs enslaved by worldly of God. He should not be subject to his own will. He should aims, such conduct is reprehensible.
Geetha Vahini 227 228 Geetha Vahini This is the teaching of the Geetha. You should not mind is not wholeheartedly put into action, then it becomes worship the Lord, as an emergency measure. When the sheer hypocrisy. Be convinced that the doer, the deed and tongue is affected and does not relish food, people seek the doing are all He. Be devoted to Him, rather than to hot pickles. So too, when grief afflicts, people seek God! riches, wife and children. This kind of demonstrative devotion is rampant today, Where your mind attaches itself, there your Bhakthi perhaps due to the influence of the fundamental hypocrisy also stays. Bhakthi is pure as the waters of Ganga. Karma is of this age. Hollow devotion seeking to exhibit the strength as the water of the Yamuna. And Jnana is as the Saraswathi, of one’s attachment to the Lord is unfortunately evident flowing secretly and mysteriously underground and even among ‘great’ Sadhakas and persons who have sanctifying itself, by merging with the other two. It is the renounced ‘everything’ for the sake of Him, whom they consider to be their ‘All’! For many, Bhakthi is a ‘burkha,’ commingling of these three that is called Triveni (the merger a veil, which is worn when on pilgrimage or when of the three). It means the disappearance of the mind, the approaching elders or when visiting temples. Once they are “becoming-one” of the three Gunas. It brings about the back home, they discard the veil and with it, all ideas and destruction of ego. feelings of reverence for the Lord. However, there are many who are ignorant of these These are but exhibitionist stunts. Bhakthi, however, basic facts. They dip in water twice a day and go through has to be steady and full. It is the establishment of the mind the morning, noon and evening rituals, worship the household in the Lord, under all situations at all times. Many assert that gods, draw lines of ash or sandal paste on their brows, all their acts are dedicated to Deva (God) but their attitude arms and chest, put dots of saffron on their faces and wear shows that they are dedicating them to Deha only. Instead strings of beads and rosaries round their necks and roam of dedicating them to God, they dedicate them to themselves, about from temple to temple or from one spiritual teacher the bodies with which they ignorantly identify themselves. to another. They circumambulate holy shrines. They attend They assert, “This I offer to Krishna,” but really, it is an many discourses, puranic recitals and readings of scriptures. offering to their Puthra (son). “This is an offering to Rama,” The best we can say about such persons is that they are they declare. But their urge reveals that it is an offering to engaged in good activities. We cannot say they are Bhakthas. their “Raga,” (sense of attachment, passion). How can these acts be dignified by the word dedication or offering? Bhakthi has no relationship with dress and speech. On Dedication inspires the body, mind and speech. If what the basis of mere raiment and religiosity of expression, we you speak is not approved by the mind, if what is felt in the cannot call a person “a devotee of the Lord.” Bhakthi is a
Geetha Vahini 229 230 Geetha Vahini matter of the inner consciousness, of feeling rather than You can either see the whole universe as God, the whole external behaviour or conduct. Where there is smoke, you Viswa (universe) as Visweswara (Lord of the universe) or, can infer there must be fire. But there are some types of fire you can see Viswa and Visweswara as separate and distinct. which do not emit smoke, though there is no smoke which But both are the same. You may see the cloth as yarn or does not originate from fire. There is a possibility that acts you may see ‘yarn and cloth’ as separate entities. But whether you realise it or not, yarn is cloth. Cloth is yarn. will be done without feeling. But you cannot say that all feeling must be expressed through outer show. Even without To see yarn and cloth as distinct, is the Saguna pomp and outer show, it is possible to have sincere feeling. Upasana, the worship of God with attributes. To see yarn The pure feeling is the important thing. Mere pompous outer as included in the cloth and the cloth as a collection of yarn, activity is positively harmful to progress if one aspires at all and the two as identical, is to worship the Nirguna aspect. for progress! This Bhakthi is not something that can be imported The question that Arjuna asked drew this further from somewhere. It is not something that is supplied by answer: Of course, there are two different types of Bhakthas: someone. It does not grow from the ground or fall from the the Saguna Bhaktha and the Nirguna Bhaktha, the Votary skies. It wells up from oneself, it is selfless attachment to of the Formful One and the Votary of the Formless. Among the Lord. The attachment, the love that is inherent in man, should not flow wildly in diverse channels. It should flow the devotees, the Aartha (distressed), the Aartha-arthi (the uninterruptedly in the direction of God; then, it becomes poor) and the Jijnasu (the inquirer) are all eager about the Bhakthi. This love is in every living being. Birds and beasts, Nameful and the Formful aspects of Godhead. Just as for insects and worms, all have love, inspiring them, filling them, every auspicious act the right foot is placed first, the right to the extent that is appropriate to each. In short, life is foot of Nirguna Bhakthi must be used for the attainment of love. Love is life. Liberation. That is the “all-auspicious.” That is to say, the sadhana of the Form-less Godhead alone gives illumination. Each member of all living species has many-sided love Both aspects have value and are indispensable. How long towards offspring, parents, comforts and guards its food can anyone have one foot inside and another outside? Even and drink, its joys and plays. Each of these types of love or if that were possible, of what avail is it? So, Saguna Bhakthi attachment has a distinct name suited to the objects on which has to be adopted as sadhana, and Nirguna Bhakthi is the it is fixed. It is called affection when directed towards goal to be reached. offspring. It is named infatuation when it is directed towards
Geetha Vahini 231 232 Geetha Vahini persons who are less fortunate, comradeship when flowing towards equals, attachment when extended to goods or places. It becomes fascination in some cases, friendship in others. When it is directed towards elders and teachers and parents, it becomes reverence, humility, etc. But Bhakthi is a word that is used only with reference to love as directed to the Lord. When this love is broken up into many streams flowing in many directions and towards many points, it causes only grief, for it gets fixed on mortal things of the moment. Instead, allow the Love to flow single-pointedly to the Ocean of the Lord’s Grace; this is the sadhana called Bhakthi. Why waste life in the salty marsh of Samsara? Strive rather to reach the vast Ocean of Grace. There you realise yourself. You attain Sath-chith-anandam (Being-awareness-bliss). How holy is that consummation, how filled with Bliss! The Gopikas strove and succeeded in this sadhana. Every moment, under every condition, every thought, word and deed of the Gopikas was dedicated to the Lotus Feet of Sri Krishna. That is why the Gopikas are called, “Yogis.” When Lord Krishna Himself addresses the Gopis as Yogis, you can gauge the height of spiritual sadhana they had achieved.
Geetha Vahini 234 Geetha Vahini Readers might therefore infer that the characteristics of the votaries of the Saguna and the Nirguna or Akshara aspects of Godhead are all identical. Arjuna was overjoyed at Krishna’s reply. He exclaimed, “I have now clearly understood this point. But I want you to tell me how I ought to proceed, how I must act to win the Lord’s Grace,” and fell at the Feet of Krishna. Narayana lifted Nara (Arjuna) and said this to him, “Arjuna! he said, You have no need now for acquiring the characteristics of either of these. They CHAPTER XXII are not within easy reach. I shall tell you of a path that is easier than these two. That path will surely confer on you My Grace. A rjuna questioned further, on the basis of “This is that path: Establish your mind and intelligence Krishna’s answers. “You described the in Me. If you cannot accomplish this and find it difficult, characteristics of the votary of the Saguna give up your egoism and carry on activities that are moral aspect of Godhead. You said that persons with such and holy. If even this is too difficult, give up attachment to characteristics are yogis. I am indeed happy that I came to the fruits, the consequences of all your acts, offer them to know all this. But just as the Saguna votaries have Me as Krishna-arpanam (offerings to Krishna). Offering your characteristics, the votaries of the attributeless Godhead, the Nirguna aspect, they too must have characteristics by acts to Me should not be a mere vocal exercise. Take care which they can be recognised, is it not? Please tell me about that you do so, by word, by deed and by thought, mano- them. I would like to know.” vaak-karma, as they say. At this, Nandakumara (Krishna the son of Nanda) of “Do you feel that even this is beyond you? Then you lovely form replied, “Arjuna! The votaries of the Nirguna will be made aware of the aftermath.” After saying this much, aspect must acquire full control of their senses. Next, they Krishna sat silent for a while. must be unaffected by circumstances. Third, they must be of service to others in distress. Such will be the nature of Take note of this. The aspirant for Grace must have the Upasakas of Akshara (devotees of the changeless), the before his mind the act and not its consequence, beneficial Imperishable.” or otherwise. That is the reason why Gopala said that Jnana
Geetha Vahini 235 236 Geetha Vahini is superior to Abhyasa (systematic practice), Dhyana is that is not enough for bringing the harvest home. The plot superior to Jnana, and the giving up of attachment to the has to be ploughed and partitioned, watered and made ready consequences of your acts is superior to Dhyana. Such for the sowing. And then, the sprouts have to be fostered non-attachment, Krishna said, will confer Shanthi (peace). and guarded into maturity, until the crop ripens and can be collected and garnered, in the granary. “Bhakthi and Dwesha (hate) are as fire and water. Devotion and hate cannot dwell together. I love those who Similarly, the thorny bushes of affection, hate, envy, feel no difference between grief and joy, affection and dislike, pride, etc. have to be uprooted from the region of the heart, good and bad. If hate, in whatever form, in howsoever slight and the field has to be ploughed by means of “good deeds.” a quantity, resides in the heart, that person cannot be a Then the saplings of Ananda have to be planted therein. Bhaktha. The Bhaktha must be convinced that all this is The growing crop has to be fostered attentively by discipline Vasudeva, ‘Vasu-deva-sarvamidam.’ That is to say, one’s and Sraddha (faith). At last, as a result of all this effort, the own Atma is everywhere in everything. This truth must be harvest of Ananda (bliss) will fill one’s granary. realised, acted upon and experienced. Hating another is The mere removal of hate from the heart will not ensure hating oneself; scorning another is but scorning oneself. Ananda. Love too should be cultivated. That is to say, uproot Finding fault with another is finding fault with oneself,” hate and plant love. If the absence of hate ensures Bhakthi, Krishna continued. hill and anthill, tree and twig, mud and mountain—what do Readers might be troubled by a doubt on this point. these hate? They have no dislikes. But for that reason, do Can the mere absence of hatred or contempt of another we ascribe Bhakthi to them all? We do not, for that would endow one with the full consciousness of the truth of “Vasu- be absurd. The Bhaktha must first be free from hate and full deva-sarva-midam”? No, the mere absence of hate, etc. of Love. Besides, his Love must express itself as service of cannot secure the “Dweller within,” and the Ananda of the distressed and the grieving, declared Gopala. recognising Him. That will not win the Grace of the Lord. Arjuna was listening to all this with great attention. Then The task of the ryot (farmer) who cultivates the crop is he asked, “Krishna! Are these three enough? Or are there a good example of this. If you pay attention to this, the any more to be followed and practised? Please tell me.” truth will be known and doubts will vanish. Before sowing Krishna replied, “The mere planting of the saplings is not the seed on a plot of land, the ryot removes all the wild enough, the field has to be watered and manured. The growth, the bush, the scrub, the other small growths. But removal of hate and the planting of love have achieved only
Geetha Vahini 237 238 Geetha Vahini the first stage. As soon as the sprouts have appeared, the Arjuna then asked, “O Lord, you often mention two processes of Nirmamakara (absence of possessiveness) Prakruthi and Purusha. I am eager to know what exactly is and Nirahamkara (absence of ego) have to be followed. Prakruthi. What are its characteristics, what exactly is its They are like watering and manuring. These two are essential nature?” Krishna replied to this question in a simple easily- for the successful crop of Ananda. understandable manner. “Arjuna! Prakruthi has another name too. It is called Kshetra also. Prakruthi means this Prapancha, “That is to say, you will have to rid yourself of the this Composite of the Five Elements. There are two entities feelings of ‘mine’ and ‘I.’ They are not distinct. The first in this Prapancha or Prakruthi or Nature. One is inert and springs from the second and both arise from Ajnana, the the other active (the jada and the chaithanya). That is to say, ignorance of the fundamental Truth. For, once rid of Ajnana, one is the seen, the other is the seer. The knower is the the sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ will not give trouble. They have aham, the known is the Idam, the ‘I’ and the ‘this.’ no place in him. Hence, it is laid down that the aspirant for “Prakruthi or nature is the sum of attributes or Bhakthi must possess Sathatham Samthushti, contentment characteristics. The Gunas, Thamas (delusion), Rajas (grief) always. What does this mean? It implies contentment under and Sathwa (joy) are the attributes of Prakruthi. Nature is all conditions, wellness or illness, loss or profit, grief or but the permutation and combination of these Gunas. So joy. Whether one’s wish is fulfilled or not, the mind should also are the attributes of doer and enjoyer, Karthrthwa and not lose equanimity, and poise.” Bhokthrthwa.” The mind loses balance if the slightest obstacle arises Arjuna wished to continue his questions. So, Krishna in the path it frames for itself. It is so fickle. Why, if the cup said, “My dear brother-in-law! You are eager to question of coffee is not forthcoming in time, if you miss seeing two again?” Seizing the chance, Arjuna put in his query. “Krishna! films in one week, if you could not squat before the radio, You have explained the Prakruthi Thathwa or Nature both in the morning and in the evening for long hours, if Principle. Now, I wish very much to know what is meant by many such trifles are denied or disturbed, you feel Purusha: what are the characteristics, what is Its nature.” overshadowed by discontent. Samthushti is the state of mind which is unaffected by the achievement or non-achievement “Arjuna!” Krishna said, “Whether you call It Purusha of any wish, the happening or non-happening of any event. or Kshetrajna or Jneya, it is the same. Kshetrajna is the The mind must be undisturbed, without excitement or knower of the Kshetra or Field. Jneya is that which is known. disappointment. Purusha is the Jiva and Prakruthi is the Deha or the Body.
Geetha Vahini 239 240 Geetha Vahini The embodied is the Purusha, the person who knows the “Just as the ryot knows the nature and characteristics body. The Deha or body has also a number of names, each of the field, the Kshetrajna or the Jivi must know the nature having a significant meaning. It is sarira, because it wastes and qualities of his body. The only difference between away; deha, because it is liable to be burnt. The Jiva is that Kshetra and Kshetrajna is the syllable ‘jna.’ It means jnana, which activates the body and becomes aware of its he who knows, the knower. So, he who knows the field or limitations.” the body, its excellences and deficiencies, he is the Kshetrajna. That which has no such knowledge, the inert Arjuna was pestered by doubt at this answer and so material thing, that is the Kshetra.” he started another series of questions. “Krishna, how did “Krishna,” Arjuna asked, “Of what benefit is it to know this wasting and destructible body come to be called Kshetra these two entities: Kshetra and Kshetrajna?” Krishna laughed. or Field?” Arjuna was indeed a clever listener. Krishna He said, “What a foolish question to ask. By inquiring and answered him with a great deal of patience. knowing about the nature of the Kshetra, one’s grief is destroyed. Knowing about the nature of the Kshetrajna, Krishna replied, “It is through this body that merit can Ananda or Bliss is acquired. This Ananda is also designated be acquired by engaging in various beneficent activities. The as Moksha.” body is the vehicle for earning Jnana or the Universal Vision. It is the body that leads you on to Liberation itself. It is the Krishna then relapsed into silence. But Arjuna who is repository of such great achievements and so it is called the representative of all mankind on the battlefield between Kshetra. Kshetra means an armour, for it protects and guards the higher and the lower impulses, prodded Him further. the Jivi from harm. Another meaning is ‘Field,’ a meaning “Krishna! Who are those who experience both these, the that is full of significance. Whatever seeds are sown or destruction of grief and the attainment of bliss? Is it the Jivi saplings planted in the field, the harvest depends on their or the Deha? Please elucidate.” nature and quality. The body is the field, the Jivi is the Kshetrapalaka, the protector of the field and the crop. Krishna replied, “Arjuna! The Kshetra or body is Sowing the seeds of meritorious deeds, one reaps joy and associated with the Gunas or attributes, Thamas, Rajas and happiness. Sowing the seeds of sin, one reaps the harvest Sathwa. So, the Jivi when in contact with it and when it of grief and worry. Sowing the seeds of Jnana, one garners identifies itself with the body, imagines that it is experiencing the harvest of Moksha or Liberation from the bondage of grief and joy which are the consequences of those Gunas. birth and death. The Purusha or the Kshetrajna has no real relationship with
Geetha Vahini 241 242 Geetha Vahini the Gunas. He is just a witness. When iron is in contact with him assume many roles. The three Gunas represent the three fire, then it has the power of scalding. But it is not iron that aspects of human nature. Rajo Guna is the attachment that scalds, it is the fire. Through contact with Prakruthi, Purusha brings about desires and creates eagerness to enjoy the appears as the doer and experiencer. objective world that is ‘seen.’ It breeds desire for physical and heavenly pleasure. Thamo Guna cannot grasp the reality. “Therefore, it is not proper to infer that the Jivi is having So, it misunderstands easily and takes the false to be the grief and joy by the very fact of its occupying the body true. It lands persons into negligence and error. It binds, which is the vehicle of the Gunas. The earth sustains and instead of releasing. Sathwa Guna controls the cause of helps the seed to grow into a tree or to decline. It is the grief and sorrow, encourages people to follow the path of Guna of the earth that causes these two. So also, the seed real joy and happiness. Therefore, being single-pointed and of Jiva Thathwam grows and blossoms into Brahma unaffected by either of these three is the basis for purity Thathwam in the body, which is the Earth-principle. Just as and steadfastness. manure and water are essential for the tree to bloom and Have the glass chimney of the lamp clear. Its light will bear fruit, Sathyam (truth), Saantham (peace), Samam shine bright. Have a glass that is multicoloured. Its light will (internal self-control) and Damam (external self-control) are be dimmed. On the other hand, if the lamp is kept inside a essential for the blossoming of the Spirit into Atmic wisdom. mud pot, the darkness will continue as it was. The lamp is The attributes or Gunas of Prakruthi make it assume the same but the container affects its expression. Sathwa multifarious forms. Guna is the lamp that shines clear through the white glass chimney. Rajo Guna is the many-coloured glass chimney “Think of this one point. Then the whole problem will that makes the light dim and poor. And Thamo Guna is the become clear. Man is happy at one time, miserable at mud pot inside which the lamp is totally ineffective. another. He is afraid one moment and courageous at another. Why? Because he is shaped so by the Gunas. Do you say Sathwa Guna is Atma Jnana. Rajo Guna is sullied to no? Then how can you explain these changes? They alone some extent, as smoke sullies the chimney and dims the can transform man from one phase to another like this. light, and it also agitates the flame of the lamp so that it is not straight and steady. Thamo Guna is the suppression of “If the three Gunas, Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas are the light or Jnana that is the very nature of Man. equally balanced, then there will be no change in him. This never happens. It is always out of balance. When one is dominant and the others are dormant, then Prakruthi makes
Geetha Vahini 244 Geetha Vahini urge will drive them on to win fame and take pride in their achievements. They will yearn for their own good, along with the good of others. Those who are endowed with Thamo Guna are overcome by the darkness of ignorance and so, they grope about, not knowing what is right and what is wrong. “Any one of these three Gunas makes the person unfit for the realisation of the highest Reality, which liberates the CHAPTER XXIII individual and merges him in the Universal. Since the person is embedded in Prakruthi, he fondly believes himself to be experiencing the Gunas which form Prakruthi. But this is an “ The three Gunas, Sathwa, Rajas and Thamas, illusion. To destroy this illusion, inquiry into the nature and undergo various permutations, combinations and characteristics of the Kshetra or Prakruthi has become modifications and become manifested as all this necessary. For the beginner, the Sadhaka, inquiry into Creation, this Universe, this Prakruthi. Therefore, this Knowledge and the Known are essential. But the Jnani has Prakruthi is subject to changes. It is not fixed. True. But the to pay more attention to these Gunas. The Known is the Atma is Chaithanya (consciousness) which is Theojorupam, Reality, the experience of the Divine Basis of All.” sheer effulgence. And so it is not subject to blemishes or Arjuna listened attentively to all this and at the end, he modifications. The body is Prakruthi. Buddhi and Manas asked, “O Lord! What are the qualities that a Jnani should are also Prakruthi. For this reason, they too differ according possess?” Krishna replied, “Partha! He must have the twenty to the degree of excess or deficiency of one or other of the virtues in ample measure. You might ask what they are. I Gunas. shall tell you about them, listen. But do not conclude that “Sathwa Guna is steady, pure, unselfish, light. So those the goal can be reached when you have them all. The goal is who have this characteristic will have no wish or want. They Immortality, Amrithathwam. That can be reached only by will be fit for the knowledge of Atma. Those with Rajo Brahma Sakshathkara, experiencing Brahman, as Sarvam Guna will be engaged in acts tarnished with a tinge of ego. Brahman. When Knowledge is full, the Knower becomes They may have the urge to do service to others, but that the Known.
Geetha Vahini 245 246 Geetha Vahini “For this consummation, one has to be purified by Please describe them to me in some detail.” Krishna said, virtues. Then the Known can be experienced and Realisation “Arjuna! I am delighted at your earnestness. Listen. reached. I shall, therefore, first tell you about this. Virtue “The first virtue is Amaanithwam, Pridelessness, first, then victory. What a splendid path! To seek Brahman humility. So long as you have Maanam or pride, you cannot without first ensuring a moral and virtuous life is like desiring earn Jnana. Man’s behaviour should be like the behaviour a flame, without lamp or wick or oil! Acquire all these three, of water. Whatever colour you pour into water, it absorbs it then, you light it and get light. So it is with the light of and it never asserts its own colour. It is humble, without Brahma Jnana, or Realisation of Brahman. conceit. But now, the behaviour of man is quite contrary. “There is one point here which Sadhakas have to note When he does the smallest service or donates the slightest carefully. The lamp, the wick and the oil must be amount, he is anxious that people should know about it. For this, he himself goes about prattling or arranges to get it proportionate. If the wick is too big for the lamp or too published. The absence of such pride and ambition is what small, if the oil is too much or too little for the wick, if the is recommended as Amaanithwam. lamp is too small or too huge for the oil or the wick, the flame will not burn brightly, and give light. Clear steady light “Now for the second: Adambhithwam, vanitylessness. can be secured only when all three are in proper proportion. This is a very great virtue in man. It means the absence of The three Gunas too must be in equilibrium to yield maximum pretence, pompousness, boasting that one is great when result, the result of Liberation. The three Gunas are bonds. one is not, claiming that one has power when one has Man is bound by them like a cow whose forelegs are tied nothing, that one has authority when one has no such title.” together, whose hind legs too are bound and whose neck Here, readers will note one point. The world today is full of and horns are bound by a third bond. The threefold Gunas this false pretence, this hypocrisy. Whichever field of activity are such threefold bonds. How can the poor beast move you watch, whomsoever you observe, you discover this freely when it is bound so? The Sathwa Guna is a golden dire defect. The government of nations are in the hands of rope, the Rajo Guna, a copper rope and the Thamo Guna, people who are pretenders to power, authority and capacity. an iron rope. All three bind effectively in spite of the Those who have no knowledge claim to know everything. difference in the cost of material. As bonds, all three are Those who have no one even to help them at home, claim obstacles to freedom of movement.” that they have a huge following. Arjuna asked, “O Lord! You said that twenty virtues “In every activity, this hypocrisy is the very first step. are essential for becoming entitled to Jnana. Which are they? This ruins man in every field, like a pest that destroys the
Geetha Vahini 247 248 Geetha Vahini crop. If this is wiped off, the world will be saved from agreement of action, speech and thought. This applies to disaster. Pretence will make you lose this world and the secular and spiritual activity. This is a facet of the fourth next. It is harmful at all times and places. It does not suit virtue, Adambhithwam (vanity). ordinary men. How can it then be beneficial to the Sadhaka? “The sixth is Aacharyo Pasana: the reverential service “The third virtue is Ahimsa. This also is an important rendered to the spiritual teacher. This will promote affection virtue. Himsa (violence) is not simply physical. It means for the pupil and so he will benefit a great deal. But the even more, the mental pain that is inflicted, the anxiety and Guru who has no goal will only mislead the disciple into worry that are caused to others by your actions and words. perdition. The Guru must shower Grace on the disciple as If you desist from causing physical pain to others, you cannot freely and as spontaneously as the mother cow feeds the claim to have Ahimsa. Your activities must not cause pain, young calf with milk. The teaching of the Guru is the source must be unselfish. Your thoughts, words and deeds must and sustenance for attaining God and acquiring Liberation. all be free from any motive to cause such pain. “The seventh virtue is Soucham, or cleanliness—not “Then, we have Kshama (forbearance) as the fourth. merely outer cleanliness but inner cleanliness. And what is This is called Kshanthi, as well as Sahana (putting up with inner cleanliness? The absence of affection and hatred, of something). It means that you should consider as unreal, desire and discontent, lust and anger, and the presence of the evil that others do unto you, the loss that you suffer Daivi (good i.e., godly) qualities. Water cleans the body. through them, the hatred they evince towards you. Treat Truth cleans the mind. Knowledge cleans the reasoning these as you treat a mirage. That is to say, you must develop faculty. The individual is cleaned by penance and discipline. that degree of patience or fortitude. It is not the helpless putting up with the evil that others do because you are “The eighth virtue is called Sthairyam: steadfastness, powerless to retaliate. It is the expression of the Peace that fixity of Faith, the absence of fickleness or waywardness. reigns in the heart, this outer behaviour or Kshanthi. True The Sadhaka must hold fast to what he has once fixed his many people put up with the injury that others inflict because faith upon, as conducive to his spiritual progress. He should they lack physical, economic or popular support. Their not flirt from one ideal to another, changing the goal from suffering cannot be honoured as real Kshama. day to day. This is also referred to as Deeksha. Fickleness “Next, let us consider the fifth: Rjuthwam, is the product of weakness, a weakness that has to be straightforwardness, integrity, sincerity. It means the scrupulously avoided.
Geetha Vahini 249 250 Geetha Vahini “The ninth in the list is Indriyanigraha, the control of of escaping from them. That is the greatest mystery, the the senses. Be convinced that the senses have to subserve wonder. your best interests, not that you should subserve the interests “If only you go to the root of the problem, you will of the senses. Do not be the slave of the senses, rather realise that whatever else you may escape, you cannot escape make them your slaves. Death. What man conceives as happiness now is, in reality, “Next: the tenth virtue, Vairagyam, detachment, only misery in the guise of happiness. So, understand the renunciation, loss of appetite for sound, touch, form, taste, truth of these things. Reflect upon the flaws in the reasoning smell, etc. The senses run after these, for, they titillate them which delude you. Then, as a result, detachment is strengthened and through that, you attain Jnana. Therefore, and give them temporary joy. But the senses are not O Arjuna, liberate yourself from janma (birth), mrithyu interested in Dharma-artha-kama-moksha of the sublime (death), jaraa (senility), vyadhi (illness) and dukha (grief).” type. The Atma can be discovered only through the pursuit Thus spoke Krishna exhorting Arjuna with a great deal of of the sublime. affection. “The eleventh virtue is Anahamkara, absence of Then He spoke of Aasakthi or Anaasakthi, the egoism. Egoism is the breeding ground of all vices and faults. withdrawal of desire from objects, the absence of yearning. The egocentric individual pays no regard to right and wrong, The greed to possess things that you see is caused by good and bad, godly or wicked. He does not care for them, egoism. “I must have this,” “I must be the proud owner of nor does he know about them. He is completely ignorant of this valuable thing.” This is how egoism prompts. It is a Dharma and morals. He will not conform to justice. To be strong cord that binds you to objects. Withdraw the mind devoid of this poisonous quality is to be endowed with and treat all as manifestations of the Lord’s Glory. Love all Anahamkaram. Egoism is a foe in the guise of a friend. things as expressions of His Glory, but do not delude “The next virtue is called: Janma-mrthyu-jaraa- yourself into the belief that possessing them will make you vyaadhi-dukha-doshaanudarsanam, which means only happy. That is an illusion. Do not dedicate your life for their this—the awareness of the inevitable cycle of birth and death, sake. Use them for your needs, as and when necessary, that of senility and disease, of grief and evil and other signs of is all. That kind of impulse activating you will be a great the temporariness of this created world, and life in it. Though handicap in your progress towards liberation. Whatever you people see these things happening to them as well as others, may acquire as property will have to be given up some day. they do not investigate the reasons for these and the methods You cannot take with you on that last journey even a blade
Geetha Vahini 251 252 Geetha Vahini of grass or a pinch of dust. Keep this fact ever before the God. When Sankata (trouble) overpowers, you take refuge mind’s eye and then, you can realise the Reality. in the Lord of Venkata. When joy is restored, you throw Him overboard. When you are down with fever and your Before one’s birth, one has no relationship with this taste is ruined and your tongue is bitter, you crave for some world and its material objects. After death, they and all kith hot pickle. But when the fever subsides, you are normal and kin disappear. This sojourn is just a game played in the again, you do not relish the same pickle. Bhakthi is not a interval. Getting fascinated with this three-day-fair is foolish temporary salve. It is the unbroken contemplation of God indeed. Desire tarnishes the mind, and makes man unfit for without any other interposing thought or feeling. higher pursuits. The Sadhakas who seek Liberation and Realisation must rid themselves of desire. For, like grease, Whatever the activity, or recreation or talk, it must be it sticks and is difficult to remove once it is contacted. saturated with the Love of God. That is Ananya Bhakthi. After this, attention has to be paid also to another Thereafter comes Ekanthavasam, dwelling in Solitude. He virtue, Samathwasthithi, the state of equanimity, of must be fond of being alone. This does not mean keeping undisturbed peace, during joy and grief, prosperity and the body in some solitary place, far from the haunts of men. adversity, happiness and misery. This is the fifteenth virtue There must be solitude and silence in the mind. All its of a Jnani. Being elevated or depressed by success and occupants must be forced or persuaded to quit. The mind defeat, profit and loss, honour and dishonour is an activity should be nirvishaya, contentless, turned away from the that is futile. Accept all equally as from the Grace of God, objective world. His Prasada (sacrament or divine gift). As you wear shoes The eighteenth virtue which helps to promote Jnana is to tread over thorny places, or hold an umbrella to escape said to be absence of interest in the company of men. That getting wet in rain or sleep inside a mosquito curtain to is to say, absence of the desire to mix with people engrossed escape the stings of insects so too, arm yourself with an in affairs that concern the objective world. One can attain unshaken mind that is confident of the Lord’s Grace and equanimity even in the midst of wild animals. But it is difficult bear with equanimity, praise or blame, defeat or victory, to win it while among worldly-minded men. Sadhana will be pleasure or pain. To live bravely through life, thus Sama- chith-thathwam (equanimity under all circumstances) is affected by the company one keeps. Good men keep you declared essential. good. Bad men drag you away into badness. Next is Bhakthi without any other thought or feeling, Of course, it is hard to find out who are good and Ananya Bhakthi. When grief overtakes you, you run to who are bad and then settle among the good. So, it is
Geetha Vahini 253 254 Geetha Vahini advisable to avoid people and concentrate on sadhana. The Of the above-mentioned twenty, if honest efforts are human mind is like iron. If it falls in mud, it rusts and made to earn even two or three, the rest will come naturally disintegrates. If it falls into fire, it loses dross and becomes to the seeker. No special effort is needed to earn them. As pure. Therefore, if man joins the company of Jnanis, it is progress is made on the path, one acquires not only the better than being in solitude. Note how Narada who was the twenty, but even a larger number of virtues. The twenty are son of a housemaid became a Rishi because he fell in the mentioned here because they are the outstanding ones, that company of good men; Ratnakara who was a cruel hunter is all. Sadhana, based on these virtues, takes one easily to got the company of the Seven Rishis and so he was the goal. That is why Krishna emphasised these. transformed into the First Among Poets, the Adikavi. Evil Equipped with these, one can realise the Self. There company is highly detrimental. A red-hot iron ball is capable need be no doubt on that for they lead to the knowledge of causing more damage than a flame of fire. A sinful man that the body, the senses, the intelligence, the inner is more to be avoided than sin itself. Sadhakas have to be consciousness—all are affiliated to the Prakruthi aspect. He vigilant about the company they keep. who is distinct from all this is the Purusha. Purusha is He The nineteenth virtue is the “awareness of the distinction who is aware of the Kshetra, the Kshetrajna. When one is between Atma and Anatma.” Fix your consciousness always able to distinguish between Purusha and Prakruthi or which on the Atmic Reality and discard the body and the senses is the same thing, between Kshetra and Kshetrajna, he as unreal and impermanent. Atma is the Eternal. So establish becomes the witness and is free from all touch of want or yourself only in that and not in the transient non-Atmic wish. illusions or objects. Life is a struggle to achieve victory over the illusion which haunts: “I am the eternal Atma in you and in all. So fix the mind on Me and engage yourself in the struggle, confident of victory.” The twentieth and the last qualification one has to earn is “Thathwa Jnana Darsanam,” the vision of the true nature of “thath” (that), the Universal Principle of which the particular is but a shadow. It means that the Sadhaka should have a keen desire to visualise the universal.
Geetha Vahini 256 Geetha Vahini above and beyond all this. He is not bound or based on man or beast or bird or flower. Birds fly in the sky but they do not leave any trace behind of their path of flight. So too, however many sensory impressions fly through the inner sky of the heart, no impression should be left thereon. The heart is not affected by their flying through. CHAPTER XXIV But man sees only the superstructure, not the basis. In the garland, no one observes the string that keeps the flowers together, the existence of the string can be known only by T he awareness of one being only the witness of investigation and inquiry. The basis is the string. The flowers everything is the secret of Self-realisation. Self- depend upon it and hang together on account of it, as a realisation is either the knowledge that “I am garland. the truth of Me” or “I have known Myself” or “All are one To understand this better, take another instance. Pots, Atma” or “I have experienced that the individual and the pans, plates and pails are all made of clay. But though there universal are not distinct.” This is what every person has to is clay in all these, clay is only clay. It is not pot, pan, plate discover for himself. Mere asceticism without this, is sheer or pail. So too in the Atma, which is the basis, there are no waste of time and energy. Man is not a mere animal. He has Gunas (or characteristics) like pot, pan, plate or pail. But in him the spark of the Divine and he should not allow it to the Atma exists in the Gunas as Guna Swaroopa. It is the be extinguished. Atma which is mistaken for the Gunas, because it is Why, even when the senses operate, they are prompted conceived as limited and as with name and form. The Atma by the presence of the Atma. When the sun rises, birds take is the only reality that persists through all names and forms, to wing, flowers bloom, the human community starts its as the clay which is the only substance in all the pots and varied activities. The sun does not directly engage in any of pans. By this kind of inquiry, the conviction that the basis these. It is the prompter, that is all. The sun is not the cause. and the substance of everything is Atma or Kshetrajna or He is just the activator, the witness, the onlooker. He is Para Brahman gets strengthened.
Geetha Vahini 257 258 Geetha Vahini Then, Krishna was asked by Arjuna, thus: “It is indeed They tend to be as low as their thoughts. That is the very difficult to know that basic Atma, that inner reality of inexorable law. God is as near to you, as you are to Him. If all things. He is everywhere but is nowhere visible! He is the you keep afar, He too remains afar.” inner core of all but cannot be contacted at all! What is the There are some fine examples of this truth in the cause of this mystery?” Puranas. Hiranyakasipu sought God in all things and came Krishna replied: “Arjuna! You have not understood yet. to the conclusion that He is nowhere. Prahlada, on the other The Atma is subtler than the subtlest and so it is difficult to hand, believed that He can be found wherever He is sought cognise it. You know the five elements, do you not, earth, and so He appeared from out of the impenetrably hard iron water, fire, wind and sky? Of these, each subsequent element pillar itself! Prahlada was close to God and so God was is subtler than the previous one. Earth has five qualities: close to him. sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Water has all these The cow carries sacred sustaining milk in its own udder. except smell; Fire has only three, sound, touch and form. But unaware of this, it runs after the water in which rice has Wind has only two qualities, sound and touch. And the last been washed! So too man is unaware of Madhava who is in one, Sky has only sound. That is why each of these is subtler him as his own Atma nor does he make an effort to discover than the previous one and also more widely spread. The Him, who is his own reality. He runs after the much inferior sky is everywhere, penetrating in and through all, because it joy obtainable from the fleeting objects, with his defective has only one characteristic. How much more subtle must and deceptive senses. What colossal ignorance! be the Atma, which has no qualities or characteristics! Imagine how much more immanent and universal it must To revel in multiplicity is ignorance. To visualise the be! Those who are objectively minded cannot grasp this Unity is the sign of Wisdom, Jnanam. Savam or “those phenomenon. Only the subjective minded can have the who are dead to reality” alone see this as “many.” Only solution. “Shivam” or the Divine sees the seeming many as “One.” What is called Jneyam, Atma, Kshetrajna, and Parabrahman “This faith can come only to those who can reason is that “One” only. This was taught to Arjuna so that he things out. It is a fatal thrust on those who bark, in season might experience the Bliss thereof. and out of season, that God cannot be immanent in everything because He is not to be perceived at all. They do Readers! As the rivers have the sea as their goal, Jivas not believe that God is above and beyond the trivial qualities have Brahman as their goal. Permanent joy can never be with which they seek to measure Him. It is a pity, indeed. received by the “conscious” Jiva from “material” objects.
Geetha Vahini 259 260 Geetha Vahini Moksha is the acquisition of permanent joy. It is also called are ever wavering, unsteady, ever changing positions. In the attainment of Brahman. Fixed exclusive devotion to order to make people understand this truth and strive to Godhead can come only to those who have no attachment overcome it, it is called Aswattha. to the wild phantasmagoria of name and form, which is “This disquisition is to make man develop the higher called the “World.” That alone can win Atma Jnana. The vision and yearn for steady faith in Brahman. The objective world is the instrument for the attainment of renunciation. world can be truly understood only by two types of That is the reason why it is so tempting and so treacherous. examination, the outer and the inner. There is a reasoning He is the real Vedanthin who sees the world as an instrument, that binds and a reasoning that liberates. He who sees the for escape from its coils. world as world sees wrong. He who sees it as Paramatma Usually, the word “oordhwa” is taken to mean “above,” sees right. The world is the effect. It has a cause. It cannot “high,” etc. But if you consider the world to be a tree, then, be different from the cause. It is just a mutation of Brahman, it has its roots in Brahman. That is, the roots are above and which constitutes it. The millions of beings are the branches, the branches are below! This was taught to Arjuna by Krishna twigs and leaves. The seed is Brahman, in which all the tree thus: “The tree of Samsara or Life is a very peculiar one. It is subsumed and summarised. He who knows this, knows is quite distinct from the trees of the world. The trees that the Vedas.” you see in the world have their branches above and roots below. The Aswattha (the cosmic tree) tree of Samsara however has roots above and branches below. It is a topsyturvy tree.” Arjuna intercepted with a question. “How did it get the name, Aswattha? It means a banyan tree, is it not? Why was the tree of life, called so? Why was it not called by some other name?” A strange name for a strange tree. “Listen. Aswattha means Anithya, impermanent, transient. It also means the ‘banyan tree,’ its flowers and fruits are no good for smelling or for eating. However, its leaves will be ceaselessly quivering in the wind. So it is also called Chaladala, meaning ‘quivering leaves.’ Worldly objects too
Geetha Vahini 262 Geetha Vahini manifestations. Or else, you flounder in the flux. Just as the seed is the basis for the trunk, boughs, branches, twigs, leaves and flowers of a tree, the Prakruthi or Prapancha or world is the tree that emanates from the seed, Atma. Prapancha is the permutation and combination of the five elements which are latent in the basis, the Atma. Consider the Atma, which is the base, as essential. For it is as its manifestation that the world is expressed. He who has grasped this truth through steady discipline deserves the CHAPTER XXV name, Vedavid, one who has mastered the Vedas. “But without deep inquiry, without discriminat-ing “ Krishna! You say that those who recognise the between the real and the unreal, if one mistakes the seen world as mere world cannot claim to know the alone to be the lasting, and argues so, he is losing his way. Vedas. They must recognise it as God, How can he reach the goal? How can he attain the reality? Paramatma. The world is an affect. So it cannot be different The yearning to know this Reality comes of Daivi sampathi, from the Cause. How is this possible? The world that is Godward attributes. The Asuri sampathi (Demonic seen by us is subject to growth and decay. God or tendency) is the opposite tendency, which makes a man Paramatma is, on the other hand, eternal, true, unaffected argue that he has known when he has not, which keeps him by change. There can be no affinity between water and fire, away from all attempts to know, which induces him to is it not? How can these two be one? Please tell me. I shall establish untruth as truth.” be most happy to hear you,” said Arjuna. As soon as the Lord finished saying this, Arjuna raised “Well, Arjuna! In the cognisable world, every single his head in astonishment and said, “Gopala! You were thing displays its characteristic, Guna. The Guna depends declaring so far that the Atma is the basis for all upon the owner, the possessor. There is a basis, an Aadhara, characteristics and for all beings. That is to say You were for the characteristics possessed by every object and being declaring that You were that Basis. Meanwhile, you have in the World. That Aadhara is the Atma. Fix your attention started talking about two distinct natures, Daivisampathi on the unchanging Basis—not on the fluctuating (Divine qualities) and Aasurisampathi (devilish qualities)! I
Geetha Vahini 263 264 Geetha Vahini am getting confused. I am at a loss to decide which to “I have told you already that the Five Elements, Earth, accept and which to reject.” Water, Fire, Air and Sky are My Swabhava, My Attributes. What is this objective world except the combination of the “Arjuna! Your question is even stranger. You say that I Five Elements? What else can you call it?” never speak a word that has no meaning or do a deed that has no significance. Yet you worry over the problem which “Krishna! Without the Five, nothing can exist in this among my statements you have to accept and which you world, is it not? Then, how can I deny them? Existence is have to reject! This is senseless anxiety and hesitation. My bound with them.” dear brother-in-law, the Devas and the Asuras are not two “When you accept the five elements, you have to agree separate distinct groups. They are so divided on the basis of to the fivefold proliferation of each element, making in all the distinction in characteristics. Well, the characteristics of twenty-five thathwas or principles. Only four elements, earth, Gunas are artificial. They are not of the essence of water, fire and air are evident and perceptible. But ether or consciousness I have already told you about them. The potter sky is the basis for all. So too, Manas (mind), Buddhi makes pots, pans and plates. These latter are not essentially (intellect), Chittam (memory), Ahamkaram (ego) are all four ‘parts’ of the clay out of which they were shaped. The pot, cognised by experience, but the Antha Karana (inner pan and plate are artificial forms of the clay. The names too instrument) which is their base can only be inferred. All are artificial. These names and forms are the Gunas or things of which we are aware are but manifestations of a characteristics. The substance or Aadhara or basis is clay. Thing, of which we are unaware. They derive their strength The shapes-names-forms, the manifestation, the expressions and support from the Unseen. That Unseen Basis of which are pots, pans and plates. Clay is natural. Pots, pans and plates are artificial. Take it that the clay, the basis, the Sahaja, you are unaware is I Myself, the Atma. All are based on is My swaroopa, reality. In the names-forms, the expressions, Me. the pots, etc. are not in Me. But I am in them. I have no “That which is based is subject to change: growth, Gunas but I am in the Gunas, note this. Therefore, do not decline and modification. But the base or Aadhara should try to keep clay and pots apart as two distinct entities. That not therefore be taken as subject to change. For example, cannot be correct. It is not possible either.” consider the moon and its reflection in water. The image of “Krishna! Tell me what is the relationship between your the moon in the water is not steady. It shakes and quivers. It Swabhava (Reality, Truth) and the Swaroopa, Prakruthi, the is the water that shakes and quivers, not the moon above. objective world?” Ignorant people, who are like children, infer that the moon
Geetha Vahini 265 266 Geetha Vahini is itself shaking. The transference of the characteristics of endowment of man. Persons having these qualities are the Aadheya on the Aadhara is the fundamental Aasuric infused with the Aasuric character. Though for all outward quality. The recognition of the eternality and truth of the appearance they may be humans, they do not deserve that Aadhara even in the Aadheya—that is the real Daivi Sampathi, name. Those who have the aforesaid qualities are known as God-directed nature.” men with divine parts. Those who have the Aasuric attributes, are known as Daanava-maanavas, demonic Arjuna listened intently and with steady attention to all humans. this. Then he queried: “Madhava! You said that it is the inherent quality of nature that distinguishes these two. Which “Some men esteem themselves as part-divine but have qualities make for Aasuric and which for Daivi natures? Please they all the attributes that should characterise them. Or have clarify.” they at least Daya (sympathy), Dharma (morality), Paropakaara (service of others) and Santham (equanimity)? Krishna replied: “Arjuna! I am ever willing to clarify. I If they have these at least in a small measure, they can be only need listeners who are steady and intent. Hear this with regarded as divine. Instead, if the full battery of Aasuric unwavering attention: (1) Fearlessness, (2) Purity of emotions, equipment is evident in them, how can their declaration be (3) Awareness of the unity of all creation (4) Charity (5) Control taken at its face value? It is sheer vanity to pretend so or to of the senses (6) Sacrifice (7) Study (8) Asceticism (9) claim as such. Vanity and pomp can never be classed as Straightforwardness (10) Non-violence (11) Integrity (12) divine. They are unquestionably demonic. Equanimity, absence of anger or resentment (13) Detachment (14) Inner peace (15) Refraining from scandal-mongering and “Each one can easily analyse himself and decide to talking ill of others (16) Sympathy (17) Absence of greed which class he belongs. The class is not decided by physical (18) Sweetness and softness of speech (19) Fear of adharmic appearance, possessions, status or authority. For example, acts (20) Absence of fluctuation in the mind (21) Courage consider Ravana. He had the human form, he was an during disaster, patience and fortitude, (22) Steadiness, Emperor, he was greater than Kubera, the Lord of Wealth. (23) Cleanliness (24) Harmlessness (25) Humility. These But can he be considered part-divine for these reasons? twenty-five holy qualities are the traits of Daivi Sampathi, the No. He is declared a demon, on the basis of the Gunas he Divine endowment. had. “Pride, pomp, vanity, anger, harshness and absence “Three qualities form the fundamental basis of all of discrimination are the components of the Aasuric Aasuric or demonic natures. They are Kama, Krodha and
Geetha Vahini 267 268 Geetha Vahini Lobha (lust, anger and greed). They destroy the self and demons that harass man, demons assuming fearful and ugly foster the demon in man. They have to be overwhelmed forms. and overcome by the divine qualities of Vairagyam, Santham “But it is not a calamity to have ugly faces or frightful and Thyagam, (detachment, equanimity and renunciation). forms. At the worst, he may be called ‘repulsive’ that is all. They are the warriors to rely on in this fight. Foster these It is the repulsive character, the ugly nature that marks the warriors and they will, in a trice, wipe out the forces of calamity. A person may be beautiful in appearance. He may demonic influence. Any trace of the foes, Kama, Krodha have a parrot-like chatter—that is sweet to the ear. But for and Lobha, left unsuppressed anywhere is a potential danger. these reasons, he cannot be regarded as divinely endowed, So they must be reduced to ashes. That leads to real success born with Divine Parts, Daivaamsa. If demonic nature in the struggle for the goal. simmers in them, physical beauty and sweetness of voice cannot entitle them for Divinity. The words that emanate Desires and attachments are as roots to the tree of life. from them are vulgarised into hammer-strokes and dagger- When the roots are cut asunder, the tree dies. The rate of thrusts! Thus, Aasurisampath (devilish quality) and decline depends upon the speed and effectiveness of the Daivisampath (divine quality) are related to the qualities that cutting asunder. It will keep sprouting even if a single root is compose the nature and behaviour of the individual, and intact. It will not go dry or die. Remove every single root. not to the physical form and appearance. Then the tree perishes and becomes deadwood. The boast of men that they have destroyed all roots is vain if the tree of life is green and growing! So too, the Maya that has possessed the Jivi will perish, in proportion to the uprooting of desire, the desire that binds. “Some engage themselves in Dhyana, after reducing, to some extent only, a few urges and desires. They do not achieve full concentration. Nor are they tossed by uncontrolled agitations. They are caught in the intermediate level. What is the reason for this state of things? Full concentration can come only from full control of desire. Hence, it is declared that Kama, Krodha and Lobha are
Geetha Vahini 270 Geetha Vahini shape your nature. So at least in this birth, by regulating food and activity (aahaara and vihara), man can overcome the Aasuric tendencies that tend to prevail upon him. He can promote Sathwik tendencies through planned self-effort.” This advice was tendered lovingly by the Lord to the eager inquirer, Arjuna. Arjuna was thrilled with joy when he heard that man has the means of saving himself. He longed to inform himself further. Krishna showered Grace through His enchanting CHAPTER XXVI smile and condescended to reply. “Arjuna! food is the chief formative force. The soiled mind dulls the brilliance of moral excellence. How can a muddy lake reflect clearly? The Divine “ Krishna! You say that the Daivic (Divine) and cannot be reflected in the wicked or vicious mind. food Aasuric (demonic) natures of man are the makes man strong in body. The body is intimately connected consequences of acts and feelings that had impact with the mind. Strength of mind depends upon strength of on the individual in previous births. Since it is impossible to body, too. Moral conduct, good habits, spiritual effort—all escape from such impacts, what is the fate of those who depend upon the quality of the food. Disease, mental are condemned to carry with them this burden? Are there weakness, spiritual slackness—all are produced by faulty any means by which this can be avoided? Or can their food.” “Krishna!” asked Arjuna, “Pray tell me the constituents of Sathwik, Rajasik and Thamasik food.” consequences be mitigated? If such exist, please tell me those for I could save myself thereby.” Arjuna asked thus, “Arjuna! food to be Sathwik should be capable of in order to draw out from the Lord the remedy for all strengthening the mind as well as the body. It should not be mankind. too salty, too hot, too bitter, too sweet or too sour. It should not be taken while steaming hot. food which fans the flames Krishna gave an immediate answer. “There is no paucity of thirst should be avoided. The general principle is that of means. Listen. There are three types of Gunas: Sathwik, there should be a limit, a restraint. food cooked in water Rajasik and Thamasik. They are based on the Antha Karana, should not be used the next day. It becomes harmful. Even the Inner Consciousness. That too is dependent on the fried articles should be consumed before they develop intake of food. You are what you feed on: your activities unpleasant odours.
Geetha Vahini 271 272 Geetha Vahini “Rajasik food is the opposite of the Sathwik. It is too should not allow his mind to dwell on wicked or vicious salty, too sweet, too hot, too sour, too odorous. Such food ideas. Mere physical cleanliness or charm is no excites and intoxicates.” compensation for evil thoughts and habits. The Sadhaka who has to secure concentration has to be careful about “Lord, excuse me if I appear impertinent. I ask with a these restrictions. Otherwise, during Dhyanam, the subtle desire to know, that is all. By mere change in food habits, influences of the wicked thoughts of the cook and the can character be changed from one Guna to another? Or, servers will haunt the Sadhaka. Care should be taken to has something more to be done to supplement the have only virtuous individuals around. Outer charm, purification process? Tell me, if there is anything more.” professional excellence, reduced wages—these should not “My dear brother-in-law! If transformation of character be allowed to prejudice you in favour of dangerous cooks and attendants. Examine carefully their habits and their were so easy, wickedness and vice, so characteristic of the character. The food you eat is such an important constituent Danava nature, could have been wiped off the surface of of the physical and mental stuff with which you have to the earth in a trice. Of course, there are some things more to struggle in the spiritual field. The purity of the mind can be be done. Listen, there are three ‘purities’ to be observed: and has to be supplemented by the purity of the body as purity of the provisions, purity of the vessels in which food well as purity in its important function, speech. That is the is prepared and purity of the persons who serve the prepared real Thapas; physical, mental and vocal. food.” “The mind should be free from anxiety and worry, “It is not enough if the provisions are pure and of hate and fear, greed and pride. It should be saturated with good quality. They should have been procured by fair means. love for all beings. It has to dwell in God. It has to be No unfair, unjust, untrue earnings should be used for one’s restrained from pursuing objective pleasures. No lower maintenance. These are fouled at the very source. The source thought should be allowed to creep in. All thoughts must be as well as the course and the goal must all be equally pure. directed towards the elevation of the individual to higher The vessel must be clean, free from tarnish. The person planes. This is the proper Thapas of the mind or manas. who serves must not only be clean in dress, but clean in habits, character and conduct. He should be free from hate, “Now for the physical Thapas. Use the body and its anger, worry and indifference while serving the dishes. He strength and capabilities for the service of others, for the should be cheerful and fresh. And he must be humble and worship of the Lord, for the singing of His Glory, for visiting full of love. While attending on those who are dining, he places hallowed by His Name, for regulated exercises in
Geetha Vahini 273 274 Geetha Vahini breath control, for holding the senses away from deleterious the deficiency that is most harmful to his progress is called paths and for treading the path of God. The service of the Sathwik.” sick and the distressed, the observance of moral codes and “Krishna,” interrupted Arjuna, “May I ask a question such beneficial acts must make it sacrosanct. here? Charity however done, is charity, is it not? Why do “Vocal Thapas too has to be engaged in. Avoid talking you distinguish between Sathwik, Rajasik and Thamasik. too much. Desist from false statements. Do not take delight Are there any such?” in backbiting and in scandal mongering. Never speak harshly. Krishna answered, “Of course, there are. Among those Speak soft and sweet. Speak with the memory of Madhava who donate for charities, most are anxious to get name and ever in the background of the mind. fame. That is the motive for the act. They are after something in return for what they offer. Very few desire the Grace of “Of these three, physical Thapas, mental Thapas and the Lord and nothing else. Gifts made with that one end in vocal Thapas, even if one is absent, the Atmic effulgence view, to receive the Grace of the Lord, are Sathwik. Gifts (Atmajyothi) cannot radiate light. The lamp, the wick and made expecting something in return like fame and publicity, the oil are all essential for a light. The body is the lamp. The public esteem and power, or made in a huff or made mind is the oil and the tongue is the wick. All three must be reluctantly under pressure—these are to be classed as in good trim. Rajasik. “Some pious people consider that acts of charity are “Charity should be given with reverence and faith. It also physical Thapas. It is good that they think so. But should not be just thrown at the face of the recipient. Nor when doing charity, one has to do so after pondering over should it be given to an undeserving person or at an the place, the time and the nature of the recipient. For inopportune moment. Food for the overfed is a burden, not example, charities for schools should be given at places a boon. Hospitals in places that are inaccessible are as good where there are no schools until then. Hospitals have to be as charity thrown away. Such benefitless and wasteful charity established in areas where diseases are rampant. The hunger is called Thamasik. of people has to be appeased where famine conditions have been caused by floods or drought. The nature and condition “While engaged in Daana or charity, one has to be of the recipient has to be considered while imparting teaching very vigilant. You should not scatter it to whomsoever pleads of Dharma and Brahma Vidya, and while doing service of for it. Nor, can you shower it on all kinds of places. Be various kinds. The charitable act that removes from a person careful that you remember the three types mentioned by Me
Geetha Vahini 275 276 Geetha Vahini and then, do as seems most proper. The gift you make bloodthirsty Gods and they revel in the lore of ghosts and must not be for name or fame, it should have no motive of evil forces.” pomp or publicity. It should be purposeful and useful. In all Dear Reader! This is the heart of the teaching of the acts, the Sathwik attitude is best. This attitude must permeate Bhagavad Geetha. The body and life in it are based on food all things seen, heard and spoken.” and they are sustained by food, anna. So, food decides the Arjuna who was listening with head bent and with great level of attainment, high or low. Nowadays, emphasis is concentration to all this, drinking in the sweetness of the being laid on discipline and regulated behaviour (Nishta), Lord’s countenance, asked Him thus, “What exactly is true without reference to the Naashta (food)! However great listening and true seeing—please tell me this in some detail. and learned a person may be, however much he pays I can then follow the instruction.” He prayed to Krishna in attention to the teachings of the Vedantha and takes care to such a pleading tone that the Lord smiled kindly at him. spread them, if he neglects the strict code laid down for the food, that is the very basis of the body and its functions, he Krishna patted Arjuna on the back. He said, “Sathwik cannot succeed. The purity of the provisions, of the cook, listening is listening to the stories, experiences and messages and of those who serve what has been prepared, these are of Sages and Saints who aspired after God and realised not attended to. They feel content when their stomachs are Him. Sathwik seeing is seeing the worshippers of the Lord, filled, when hunger is appeased. The first temple they visit seeing the portraits of saints and sages, attending festivals when dawn breaks is the restaurant where ‘idli’ and ‘sambar’ in temples, etc. Rajasik seeing is seeing scenes of luxury, are offered to the Atmarama! How can such gourmands get pictures of sensuous joy, of pompous pageantry, of the concentration? Purity in cooking, purity in provisions, and exhibition of power and status and display of egoistic purity of service—how can these be guaranteed in authority. Taking delight in the description of sensuous restaurants? Who pays attention to these? Without doing scenes and incidents, in the demonstration of power and this, people complain aloud that they do not get success in authority, in the assertion of might and prowess—these are concentration, and suffer greater confusion! The effect will to be classified as Rajasik listening. Others take delight in be secured only when the proper causes function well. When listening to gruesome adventures, stories of wicked ogres bitter things are cooked, how can the final dish be sweet? and vicious deeds. Such are Thamasik individuals. They admire cruelty and terrifying tactics and they take pleasure Aahaara and Vihaara (food and recreation) are both in keeping such pictures before them. They worship demonic very carefully regulated in the Geetha, but little heed is paid
Geetha Vahini 277 278 Geetha Vahini to its teaching. Nor is it considered so essential. There are is too weak to climb stairs, climb to heaven’s heights? When people everywhere who swear by the Geetha, who expound a man is a helpless victim of coffee or cigarettes or snuff it for hours together and who preach about it. But very few how can he muster strength and courage to overcome the put its teachings into practice. The verses fill their heads, more powerful foes; anger, lust and greed? When he cannot but they are powerless to meet the reverses, with renounce dirt, how can he renounce desire? Become master philosophical cheer. Ananda and Shanthi can be secured of the tongue and then you can master sex. They are firmly only when food and recreation are cleansed and purified. interconnected, as close as the eyes and the feet. Darkness and light cannot coexist; Kama (God of lust) and Rama cannot be in the same place together. They are like fire and water. How can one escape an evil reaction if the Geetha is held in one hand and hot tea or coffee or a lighted cigarette or beedi or a pinch of snuff is held in the other? Some even justify their unregulated lives, by declaring that whatever is eaten, however eaten, wherever eaten, the stuff is rendered pure and acceptable on account of the raging fire of Jnana which they have in them! How can a bitter fruit be transformed into a sweet one, when it is dipped in a series of holy rivers? How can persons who simply speak on the Geetha get saturated with the sweetness of its message? What really happens is that those who listen to such hypocrisies lose even the little faith they have in our scriptures and become hardened disbelievers. How can a person who feels helpless to restrict and regulate his food habits be trusted to restrict and regulate his senses? If he cannot limit and control his feeding, how can he limit and control the senses? Can the nose which falls down at a cough survive a sneeze? How can one who
Geetha Vahini 280 Geetha Vahini cannot completely give up activity. How then, can man avoid being caught up in the mesh of consequences? The Geetha teaches that Karma-phala thyaga (giving up all attachment to the fruit of karma) as the greatest sadhana designed for this purpose. Whether desired or discarded, hoped for or not hoped for, every act ends in some consequence, if not immediately, at least after some time. It is inevitable. The consequence may be good or evil. But if the act is dedicated to the Lord, CHAPTER XXVII neither will affect the doer. By that sacrament of dedication, the deed is transmuted into a higher order and made divine, A holy, sacred. On the other hand, acts performed under the s the healthy glow of the body is hidden from inspiration of the ego will be fraught with bondage. sight by the clothes that cover it, the individual soul obscured by Ahamkara or egoism is not Those who are sincerely seeking to realise God, to able to reveal the splendour of the Brahma Thathwam, which achieve Him, have to become free from the taint of desire. is its treasured possession. For egoism is at the root of all Become mamakaara-sunya, devoid of feelings of “I” and evil, all defects, all deficiencies. It is born in desire, or kama. “Mine.” Then, you attain Moksha, Salvation. That is the Be free from egoism too. achievement of the goal of life. That stage knows no joy or grief. It is above and beyond them both. Krishna willed that The state of desirelessness is really the state of His friend and devotee Arjuna should reach that state and egolessness. And what is Moksha or Liberation, except liberation from bondage to the ego? You deserve Liberation so, He endeavoured to save him, by teaching him the ways when you break away from the bond of desire. and means through a variety of methods. Moreover, He used him as an instrument to receive this precious gift for Men engage themselves, by and large, in activities the good of all humanity. prompted only by the desire to benefit from the results. They withdraw from acts that bring no benefit. But the Geetha Before concluding the sacred counsel, Krishna condemns both attitudes. For whether consequences follow addressed Arjuna and said, “Give up all Dharmas and or not, one cannot escape the obligation to be active. Man surrender to Me. I shall liberate you from all sin. That is to
Geetha Vahini 281 282 Geetha Vahini say, give up Ahamkaara and Mamakaara, pride in the ego of their devotion and orthodoxy. Such people select from and in possessions and feelings of I and mine. Destroy the the words of the Lord only those portions which favour identification of the self with the body which is only its cage their inclinations. The words before and after are or prison. Get firm in the belief that all this is Paramatma conveniently ignored, because they are unpleasant, though and nought else. So, there is nothing else to be done except they are inseparable portions of the same injunction. They bowing to His Will and surrendering to His Plan. Man has ignore the vital part of the command, in spite of the claim to to give up the twin activities of commission and omission, be staunch votaries of the Geetha. Sankalpa and Vikalpa, resolving and refusing. He has to Giving up all Dharmas, “Maam ekam saranam vraja” follow the Lord’s Commands. He has to accept His Will, says the Lord. That is “Surrender to Me alone.” Have they be happy wherever He has placed him, however He has surrendered thus? No. Have they at least the deep yearning shaped him. He keeps himself far from the inquiry into the for Liberation? No, for if they had it, they would not have appropriateness or inappropriateness of his acts, but does neglected their legitimate duties. They would not have fallen them as acts of worship to the Lord, acts for which no a prey to the demands of food and sleep. Such men are reward is expected. That is the sum of his duty. glorious only in gossip. They are great only in glittering. They do not put the Lord’s Command into actual practice. Some dry Vedanthins decked with strings of beads They are too idle to do so. Not even an atom of spiritual take advantage of this teaching of Krishna to give up all endeavour can be seen in them. Dharmas and with this assurance that He will liberate them True aspirants can discern valuable truths in the divine from all sin, idly stretch their legs and loll with closed eyes. words spoken by the Lord: They shirk their legitimate duties and eat, sleep and roam Sarva dharmaan parithyajya about as much as they like or can. They do not discriminate Maamekam saranam vraja; between what is good and what is bad. Their excuse is that Aham thwaa sarva paapebhyo the Lord has commended them to transcend Dharma. When Mokshayishyami, maa suchah. elders at home or experienced seekers question their conduct, they answer, “Alas, that you too should blunder Note that the Lord has said, “Sarva Dharmaan thus. Don’t you know what the Lord has said in the Geetha? parithyajya,” not, “Sarva Karmaan parithyajya.” What then “I have accepted as the basis of my conduct, His Command, is the meaning of this statement? It means, “Perform all acts ‘Sarva Dharmaan Parithyajya.’ I have no need for advice enjoined by the Lord, for His Glorification, without getting from persons with lesser authority.” They feel very proud involved and lost in discussions of Dharma and Adharma.”
Geetha Vahini 283 284 Geetha Vahini Though you know that there is nothing for you to of tortures. But they met with total destruction. They had acquire, for you have placed complete trust in the Lord and the support of all types of parties but since they did not live only as an offering to the Lord, still, like Janaka and earn the strength of the Grace of the Lord, they were others, you have to engage yourselves in activity for the deserted by fate and ruined beyond repair. Bharatha teaches well-being of the world, Loka Sangraha. The Sarva- all people of Bharath this one lesson: Nothing can equal the bhootha anthara-atma, the soul immanent in every being is Grace of God, not even the mightiest array of arms. This is not distinct from the Atma or soul that is in you. So, be the most valuable message that it embodies. Sarva-bhootha-hithe-rathaa, that is to say, eager to promote The Geethabhavanam (Mansion of Geetha) is the the wellbeing of all beings. Perform all acts enjoined by the mansion of Sathya and Dharma, erected on the soil of India, Sastras and Scriptures for His sake, in the spirit of dedication, for the benefit of the world. Study it with faith and devotion. with no eye on the fruits thereof. This is the true Nishkama Experience the curative and restorative effects of its teachings Karma. by actual practice. For such, the Atmarama, (the Atma so full of the spring of sweetness and bliss) will be ever present Understand the Geetha well and, observing its as a reality. The Lord will shower on him His favours in a injunctions, establish yourselves in the attitude of Nishkama trice. Pray to the Lord who has all the fourteen worlds in Karma. Do all duties as acts of worship, Hari-prasadam. Him and you can certainly become master of the eight That is the sole task. Leave the rest to Him: the fruit, the treasures which give happiness here below, and what is even consequence, the result. Then, you receive the Grace of more desirable, Kaivalya (which is the fountain of Nithya Hari (Vishnu) and your life on earth is sanctified and becomes [eternal] Ananda, of Nithya Sathya [Eternal Truth] and Mithya worthwhile. Jnana [relative or temporary wisdom]). For those who follow the path of Dharma ultimate Why wander about for ghee, when you have butter victory is certain, in spite of diverse difficulties that might with you? Acquire butter, that is to say, the Grace of the hamper them. Those who stray away from the path of Dharma Lord, by implicit obedience of the rules of life laid down by might have wealth and comfort for long, but they will be Him. When that Grace is won, one need not pray separately overpowered ultimately by disaster. The Kauravas and the for Moksha or Liberation. He knows best what you should Pandavas are the brightest witnesses for this truth. get and when. He will confer what you deserve and can The Kauravas steeped in Adharma were so blinded by benefit from. Yearn for Him, suffer anguish for Him. There conceit that they subjected the good Pandavas to a variety is no need to yearn for Moksha then. If that is done with no
Geetha Vahini 285 second thought, He will destroy all sin. Hold fast to Him. He can make you Immortal, like Arjuna. Those who seek to escape from this cycle of birth and death must obey the command of the Lord as laid down in the Geetha and surrender to Him. Then, he will be crowned with success in every undertaking. He will achieve Victory.
